1. Let me introduce peace from my monography. 
2. The title is 'Making Moral Judgements'. 
3. The author Donelson R Forsyth
4. It was written in 2020 and published by the Routledge.
5. This work is relevant in a 2 main aspects: it tries to construct psychological investigation based on philosophical theory and connect it with practice. Forsynth not only sums up up-to-date approaches of studying peoples' moral positions, but develops his own, called 'Ethic position theory', together with 'Ethic Potition Questionnaire'.
6. Purpose (part) - the purpose of this part of the work is to show interdependence between Ethic positions and other psychology qualities.
7. Subject of the material - the subject of this work is 'the relations between ethic positions and other psychological qualities'
8. Main idea - the main idea of this part is to show that his Moral Position Theory finds relations with other psychological tests. Forsyth claims that he has found correlations of his theory with the main modern meausuring tests.
9. To support his claim he gives next arguments:
    - Older individuals are more likely to rely on pricniples and rules when they make moral discisions. Also, actions that cause greate harm provoke more negative evaluation
    - **Asian and black** people **less rely on common moral rules** than white people
    - **Religious people** are more likly to **rely on common moral rules** and **evaluate actions that causes harm more negative**
    - He has found that the levels of **Machiavellianism** and **psychopathy** are more often expressed when peole **reject common moral rules**, so **subjectivists are more likely to have** these traits.
10. Conclusion (importance, how useful) - To draw a conclusion, I would like to say that this book is not only important for the psychology as a whole, but also for me personally. I've found that the idea of using philosophical enquieries in psychological studies may be productive and empirically adequate.