- Adams believes that since moral facts require divine commands, and moral judgments are true, we have a good reason to believe in divine commands.
- A different defence of Pufendorf is offered by Robert Adams, who agrees with him in claiming that genuine obligations are the result of divine commands. This claim, as we have seen, might be taken to be simply Suarez’s claim; and indeed Adams cites Suarez (cautiously) in his support.⁴⁶ But his position is a defence of Pufendorf rather than of Suarez, because Adams’s concept of obligation is broader than Suarez’s on the crucial point. 
- Adams quotes Suarez’s remark that divine commands presuppose intrinsic honestas and turpitudo in the actions. He takes this remark to refer only to intrinsic goodness, not to moral rightness and wrongness; hence he translates ‘honestas’ and ‘turpitudo’ as ‘honourableness’ and ‘shamefulness’, rather than by ‘rightness’ and ‘wrongness’.⁴⁸ On this point he differs from Pufendorf, who denies any intrinsic honestas and turpitudo antecedent to divine commands. Adams seems to agree with Culverwell’s interpretation of Suarez, which treats honestas and turpitudo as intrinsically attractive and repulsive features antecedent to divine commands. According to Adams, these features constitute natural goodness and badness, but they do not constitute moral requirements. 
- Adams argues as follows that obligations need divine commands: 
    1) Obligations involve social requirements that are the basis of justifeid praise and blame, guilt, and shame. 
    2) These social requirements depend on the demands that other persons actually make, not simply on those that they are entitled to make.⁴⁹  It does not seem obvious that what I owe to people, or what I am required to do for them, always and essentially depends on what they actually demand of me or on what someone else actually demands on their behalf. It seems to depend on what they need, or on what they are entitled to, apart from anyone’s actual demands.⁵¹ 
    3) Such requirements would be too variable and alterable unless they expressed divine commands.⁵⁰ 
    4) Therefore moral requirements express divine commands. 
- While Balguy defends ftiness as a morally relevant and signifciant feature that makes actions right, Adams appeals directly to the immediate judgment that actions are right and wrong, without trying to explain this through fitness and unfitness.²⁹ 
- Adams sometimes seems to come close to acceptance of Balguy’s principle of subtraction.¹² He seems to rely on subtraction when he suggests that God is not virtuous, because God has no difficulties to overcome. Since God’s moral purpose coincides completely with God’s other purposes, the principle of subtraction requires us to deny virtue to God. But this conclusion does not satisfy Adams. For he also claims that virtue does not consist in the conquering of difficulties, but in having the power to conquer them; since God has this power, God has virtues.






#                  Difficulties

- According to Adams, obligation coincides with moral rightness and wrongness.⁴⁷ His concept of obligation is the broad concept that connects the obligatory with the required and the compulsory, rather than the narrow impositive concept that we found in Suarez. Since obligation, understood broadly, extends to the various moral properties that Suarez takes to be antecedent to divine commands, Adams must agree with Pufendorf’s view that intrinsic goodness and badness are antecedent to divine commands, but moral rightness and wrongness depend on divine commands. 
- Adams’s view is not as extreme as Pufendorf’s, since he does not take the scope of obligation to be the scope of morality. He is willing to allow that it would be morally good and admirable to give a cup of water to an innocent person dying of thirst, but he does not believe it could be morally required unless someone actually demanded it of me. This is difficult to see. If I deliberately poured the water on the ground, other people would justifiably censure me whether or not they believed that someone was demanding that I give the water; and I would appropriately feel guilty about what I had done whether or not I believed that someone was making this demand. The salient facts here seem to be that the dying innocent person needed the cup of water and that I could easily give it to him.⁵² 
- Adams, therefore, does not give us a good reason to agree with Pufendorf against Suarez on the basis of moral requirements. When Suarez recognizes intrinsic honestas and turpitudo, he thereby recognizes intrinsic moral rightness and wrongness. Similarly, Pufendorf believes that if there is no intrinsic morality, there is no intrinsic honestas and turpitudo. According to Suarez, intrinsic honestas and turpitudo are also the basis for duties (debita), sins (peccata), and blameworthiness (culpa). Suarez disagrees with Adams’s view about the source of moral requirements; Adams’s arguments ought not to persuade us that Suarez is mistaken. 