- Alexander defends an indeterminist account of Aristotle without appeal to any swerve; he accepts Epicurean arguments against determinism, believing that Aristotle’s arguments against the compatibility of universal necessity and responsibility also demonstrate the incompatibility of determinism with responsibility.
- Alexander appeals to two Aristotelian conditions for responsibility: (1) When we deliber-ate, we believe we can do either of two possible actions, and if we are responsible for our action, our belief must be true. Responsibility presupposes, then, that it is ‘up to us’ to do what we do as opposed to something else. (2) When we are responsible for our action, we ourselves are the ‘principles’ or ‘origins’ (archai), the origins are in us, and we are in control (kurioi) of the actions.⁷⁷ In Alexander’s view, these claims must be understood in an indeterminist sense.⁷⁸ The Stoics violate Aristotle’s f i rst condition, which requires alternatives that are up to us; for, in their view, an unbroken chain of suff i cient conditions leads from events that happened thousands of years ago all the way to my action. Hence past events make my action inevitable; hence it cannot be up to me to act differently. The Stoics also violate Aristotle’s second condition, which requires the origin to be in us. For the Stoic doctrine of causes and fate implies that our reasoning, deliberation, and rational assent have external causes, so that (Alexander infers) we ourselves are not the origins of our actions, and so nothing is up to us
- the voluntary and the up to us are not the same. For what comes to be from an unforced assent is voluntary;
but up to us is what comes to be with assent that is according to reason and judgment. Hence if something is up to us it is voluntary, but not everything voluntary is up to us. For non-rational animals too do voluntarily what they do according to the impulse and assent in them; but it is peculiar to a human being that some of the things coming to be from him are up to him. For his being rational is this—his having in him reason that is judge and discoverer of the appearances that fall on him and in general of things to be done and not to be done.
- Alexander assumes that I am free and sovereign over my action only if my reason is also in my control. And it is incompatible with both soft and hard determinism
- He argues that one ought to choose pleasure for the sake of the f i ne, not the other way round
- In Alexander’s view, each craft has two sorts of exercise—its exercise in preferable and in non-preferable conditions (160.31–161.1); a craft, for instance, exercises itself both in playing good f l utes and in playing bad f l utes. In that case, ‘just as in the other crafts the end is in the exercises about wished-for things and in preferable conditions,⁸¹ the same will be true in the case of virtue, if it is a craft’ (161.1–3). While recognizing that virtue is exercised in bad external conditions, Alexander suggests that this is not really the proper exercise of virtue, because it achieves its end only in preferable conditions. Since the end of virtuous action is happiness, as the Stoics agree, virtue turns out to be insuff i cient for happiness, by being insuff i cient for the achievement of its end.
- Indeed, we might argue, as Alexander does, that the division between ends and objectives makes it clear that the Stoics are wrong to identify virtue with happiness. We should regard virtue as a stochastic craft of which virtuous action is the end, and happiness is the objective.
- Alexander suggests that Aristotle’s position, expressed in Stoic terms, makes happiness the objective, because it includes preferred indifferents that are not in our control.