- Anti-eudaemonism: we value virtue appropriately only if we do not regard it as a part of, or a means to, our happiness
- Stoics and Peripatetics differs only verbally in the question of no passions vs moderate passions
- Augustine enthusiastically insists on the pervasiveness and inevitability of sin, and so he might reasonably be expected to reject the assumptions that underlie Socratic moral psychology.
- Augustine explains st. Pauline moral psychology by reference to Stoic doctrine, as he understands it
- Augustine’s interpretation of the Stoic view tends to assimilate it to an Aristotelian view.
- Augustine acknowledges that Platonists reject Manichean cosmic dualism, but, in his view, they do not entirely free themselves from Manichean error; for they believe that the body is the source of sin by being the source of non-rational desire (CD xiv 5b).
- Augustine rejects the quasi-Platonic and Manichean view, because it introduces two antagonistic wills.¹¹ This view eliminates the single deliberating agent, and substitutes a conf l ict whose outcome is independent of our choice. Though Augustine also sometimes recognizes two ‘wills’, he does not have two Manichean wills in mind. He simply refers to two tendencies of the will; he refuses to take the extra step of allowing that these are the expressions of two opposed minds or (we might say) personalities that simply conf l ict, without having anything to say to each other. He insists that ‘it was I who was willing and I who was unwilling; I was I’ (Conf. viii 22). He thinks this view completely undermine unif i ed agency, rational control, and responsibility for sin.
- He seeks, therefore, an account of will, passion, and action that avoids both the radical voluntarist account of Adam and Eve and the radical dualism that exploits the Pauline division between f l esh and spirit.
- To overcome Manichean psychological dualism, we might claim on Augustine’s behalf that the same will is involved in the choices of the f l esh and of the spirit, in so far as we ‘identify’ ourselves with each sort of choice.¹⁵
- He takes this to be 2 accounts of the ratio-passions problem:
    - Voluntarist - we may choose bad things though we know that they are bad. The free will is possible.
    - Rationalism:
        - Greek one - my rational part = me. I always pursue greatest good. If I pursue bad - it is because I miscalculated what is good and what is bad.
    - Manichean aka Quasi-Platonic - there are 2 selfs in the agent. One is rational and seeks for good. The other is non-rational and its seeks for bad. The strongest one rules agent's behavior. So, there is no free will.
    - Augustinian - There are 3 parts: rational, non-rational and will. I identify myself with non-rational first-order passions and ?->rational something<-?, using my second-order desires. **Does the will is something different from both first-order desires and second-order desires (Voluntarism)? Or it is second-order rational desires? (Rationalism)**. I act freely if I act from second-order desires. Though medieval voluntarists find support in Augustine, he seems to be an intellectualist.
- Radical voluntarist account of Adam and Eve and the radical dualism that exploits the Pauline division between flesh and spirit. Radical voluntarism does not seem to explain the influence of non-rational motivation creating the conflict between flesh and spirit. But recognition of that conflict should not, in his view, dissolve the will into conf l icting forces that make free choice and responsibility unintelligible. His discussions of the will try to satisfy these criteria for an adequate account.
- Augustine clarifies his dispute with the Stoics by distinguishing two ways of being without passions:
    - a life without passions ‘that occur contrary to reason and disturb the mind’ - impossible due to our sin nature
    - a life in which passions cannot occur to the mind at all - morally bad, because sorrow, for example, is a nature reaction to the bad things
- This defence of Augustine’s claim that the Stoics disagree only verbally with him depends on his identifying a passion with a non-rational state that precedes any assent (whereas Stoic think that there are appearances and appearances with assent (passions)). Though sometimes he says that good will make passions good and bad will do the opposite
- Augustine agrees with the Stoic view that motivation by passion requires assent. So, while Stoics claim that passions = pre-passion + assent to them, Augustine claims that passion = pre-passion (in Stoics term)
- Augustine assumes that we always seek happiness.
- Augustine rejects the Stoic view of the passions, but retains the Stoic view that we act freely and responsibly in so far as we assent. Our assent depends on our belief about what promotes our happiness, and hence it presupposes the basic desire for happiness. Though Augustine insists on the potentially misleading inf l uence of the passions, he does not suggest that they mislead us by moving us independently of the will.
- Will is not free to pursue something other than happiness, and the source of error and sin is a false belief about the sources of happiness. It is an intellectualism and eudaemonism. Hence he concludes that the will, rather than any external inf l uence or internal force, is the cause of the mind’s being subject to sin.
- He accepts eudaemonism: We do not fall into sin because we pursue our own happiness as opposed to some other ultimate end that we ought to pursue instead.
- We have no reason, therefore, to attribute voluntarism to Augustine. He emphasizes the role of the will in free and responsible action because he believes that non-rational desires can move us to free action only with our consent; he does not claim that the will moves us independently of the greater apparent good. He accepts Stoic intellectualism and avoids voluntarism.
- The will is free in relation to the passions in so far as it is capable of consenting or not consenting to the actions suggested by the passions. The will is not similarly free in relation to the apparent good, but Augustine does not suggest that this lack of freedom involves any lack of the freedom relevant to responsibility.
- Compatibilism is true
- Will - rational desire; Freewill - free deliberation
- Happiness is complete and self-sufficient
- Stoics are wrong about happibess, since they include external goods in it. Then, complete happiness are not open to us in this world
- Virtues can't free us from sin where sin = bad inclibations (for we will not be choose them, but we will still have them), so virtues are not sufficuent for happiness