- Argues that Hutcheson’s belief in a moral sense requires him to reject realism and the metaphysical independence of morality.
- Balguy both accepts metaphysically independent morality and is somewhat sympathetic to utilitarianism.
- oppose theological voluntarism. 
- Shaftesbury sketches a defence that is developed more fully, and with more specifci reference to orthodox Christianity, by Clarke and Balguy.⁵¹ 
- If Shaftesbury took approval by the moral sense to constitute moral properties, he would undermine his realism and his arguments against voluntarism. He would be subject to the argument that he aims at the theological voluntarists. In his view, we recognize God’s will as morally perfect because we regard moral properties as distinct from what God approves. Similarly, we recognize that someone’s moral sense is right because we believe in moral properties that are distinct from what the moral sense approves. Balguy uses this argument effectively against Hutcheson’s belief in a constitutive relation between the moral sense and moral properties.⁵⁵
- Hutcheson takes a step that Shaftesbury does not take, by defniing moral goodness as essentially what is approved by the moral sense. He takes the moral sense to be disinterested, and therefore he supposes that he defends Shaftesbury. This interpretation of the moral sense and its relation to moral goodness is also Berkeley’s interpretation of Shaftesbury, and it is the basis for Berkeley’s criticism.⁵⁷ But Hutcheson overlooks the fact that he defends only the motivational part of Shaftesbury’s realist doctrine, and that he undermines the metaphysical part. Balguy points out this consequence of Hutcheson’s modification of Shaftesbury; he shows that Hutcheson’s position exposes him to Shaftesbury’s argument against theological voluntarism.⁵⁸ 
- While Balguy defends ftiness as a morally relevant and signifciant feature that makes actions right, Adams appeals directly to the immediate judgment that actions are right and wrong, without trying to explain this through fitness and unfitness.²⁹ 
- Balguy, Price, and Reid, who develop and defend Clarke’s rationalism in more detail, and examine some of the objections about moral knowledge, motivation, and justification that seem to arise for Clarke.
- The rationalist Balguy argues that if we are moved wholly by non-rational desires for ends, we do not act freely and responsibly; he assumes that merit requires freedom, and freedom requires the capacity for rational motivation.⁶²
- Balguy answers that Clarke’s appeal to motivation by reason is preferable to Hutcheson’s theory of desire and action, and that Clarke’s analysis of moral judgment as rational recognition of eternal fitnesses is both true and informative. 
- Balguy criticizes this sentimentalist view. He agrees with Hutcheson’s objections to libertarian accounts of freedom that identify free action with action on no sufficient motive. But he notices that Hutcheson takes these objections to imply the impossibility of action that is not the result of non-rational instinct.² Balguy believes that if Hutcheson were right on this point, we could not justify ordinary judgments about merit, which presume rational motivation, as opposed to non-rational motivation by instinct.³ Internal determination of actions does not ensure the sort of freedom that is relevant to moral merit and demerit; hence the sentimentalist account of motivation fails to identify this freedom. Since some sort of rational motivation is necessary for freedom, motivation by sentiment, as the sentimentalists understand it, is insufficient for freedom. 
- Can the idea of motivation by reason be made more intelligible than Hutcheson supposes? Balguy suggests that recognition of the intrinsic merits of a course of action may move us to action, without any further appeal to a non-rational instinct.⁴ If we are rational agents, we can be moved by the merits of a course of action; that claim is no less intelligible and explanatory than the anti-rationalist appeal to a prior non-rational instinct.⁵ 
- On behalf of Hutcheson one might say that simply citing a belief is not enough to explain an action, and that we explain an action better if we cite both a belief and a suitably connected non-rational desire. Balguy suggests that it is no less explanatory to cite a belief in the intrinsic merits of a course of action. To be a rational agent is to be capable of acting on the recognition of intrinsic merits. 
- If Balguy is right to object to Hutcheson’s anti-rationalism about motivation, he is also right to object to his analysis of free will. For one might reasonably argue that the capacity to act on the apparent merits of different courses of action, and not simply to be moved by one’s strongest non-rational desire, is essential to the freedom that is relevant to praise and blame. Hutcheson’s attempt to dissolve questions about freedom by taking all determination by desire to imply freedom is open to objection. 
- Common sense assumes that morality in some way expresses freedom because it involves motivation by reason; but this assumption rests—according to the sentimentalist—on a mistaken view about practical reason.⁶ Still, even if a sentimentalist might take this more sceptical attitude to freedom, Balguy still shows that Hutcheson’s actual attitude is unsatisfactory; the arguments that Hutcheson offers neither support common views on freedom nor prove that rationalist views are less explanatory than Hutcheson’s anti-rationalism. 
- Hutcheson replies that Burnet’s appeal to the reasonableness of one or another end is empty.¹⁰ An end is not reasonable in its own right, but only in relation to some further end for which we have an antecedent desire. Similarly, we cannot judge an end reasonable except relatively to a further desired end. Hence judgments about reasonableness must depend on a further desire; hence we need a moral sense. To show that an end cannot be reasonable in its own right, Hutcheson argues that it is always appropriate to ask ‘What makes it reasonable?’. To say that nothing makes it reasonable, or that it makes itself reasonable, is uninformative. To say what makes it reasonable, we always have to say that it appeals to us on the basis of some further end we care about. In the case of morality, the relevant further end is the public good, which appeals to our moral sense. The mere claim that something is reasonable in itself is an appeal to an alleged brute fact. BurnetandBalguyreplythatsomereasonsmustbetakenasultimate,sincewecannotshow their reasonableness by appeal to further reasons. Similarly (according to Clarke and Burnet) no further reason can be given for accepting a mathematical axiom, but we do not infer that mathematical judgment requires a further contribution from the affections. On the contrary, mathematical judgments consist in recognizing axioms as ultimate reasons and in reasoning in accordance with them. It is equally appropriate to recognize ultimately reasonable moral principles and to judge in accordance with them. If they are ultimately reasonable, no more ultimate reasons can be given to show that they are reasonable; but it doesnotfollowthatwemustappealtosomefurthernon-rationaldesire.BalguyagreesthatifI recognizeamoralprincipleasultimatelyreasonable,Iwillnormallywanttoactinaccordance with it; but he claims that the desire results from the recognition, and does not explain it.¹¹ If a defender of Hutcheson objects that Balguy is appealing to a mere brute fact, not further explained, Balguy might answer that Hutcheson also appeals to a brute fact—a non-rational desire and a tendency to act on that desire. Can we not ask why we should act on that desire? The question ‘Why should I?’ suggests that we are looking for some further reason that Hutcheson fails to provide.  In this dispute about brute facts the anti-rationalist complains that the rationalist cannot say why we act on what we see to be ultimately reasonable. The rationalist complains that the anti-rationalist cannot say why we should act on basic non-rational desires for ends. The anti-rationalist, therefore, complains about the rationalist’s failure to provide a motivating reason, whereas the rationalist complains about the anti-rationalist’s failure to provide a normative reason. At first sight, both complaints seem reasonable. Balguy’s discussion shows that Hutcheson’s assumptions about explanation and reasons do not define all the legitimate questions that can be raised. 
- Balguy and Burnet make claims about reasons and reasonableness that presuppose that we can recognize a normative reason (answering the ‘Why should I?’ question) without having some antecedent desire to do what we see the normative reason to do. Hutcheson rejects this presupposition about reasons, and offers his own conception of reasons. In reply to Burnet he argues that reasons must be either exciting or justifying reasons, both of which rely on affections (IMS 226–7). Balguy argues against Hutcheson on this point, denying the connexion that Hutcheson alleges between justifying reasons and motivation. 
- To show that a justifying reason does not require a further sentiment, Balguy argues that we can recognize merit in an action without thereby approving of it. The recognition of merit is the ground for approval, but is not reducible to approval.¹² According to Balguy, Hutcheson’s definition of merit reduces the normative aspect of praiseworthiness—the fact that it provides a reason for praise—to the non-normative fact that it is actually praised. If Hutcheson were right, we could not distinguish qualities that deserve praise from those that receive praise but do not deserve it. 
- Hutcheson complains that Balguy’s defniition of merit by reference to worthiness of praise is useless, because it simply provides a synonymous term. We want something more informative than the nearly tautological claim than merit is worthiness,¹³ but Balguy’s definition fails to provide the ‘explication’ that we expect from a definition. Hutcheson rejects accounts that identify moral goodness with ‘conformity of affections and actions to truth, reason, true propositions, reason of things’. To distinguish moral goodness from true belief in general, we need to add something about conformity to how things ought to be, and this addition simply reintroduces goodness instead of explaining it.¹⁴ Rationalists, therefore, ought to accept his appeal to a moral sense, once they recognize that their accounts of moral goodness do not give an appropriate explication. If we explain ‘good’, ‘ought’, ‘worthy’, ‘fit’, and ‘obligatory’ through one another, we have got no further towards an explication. An explication ought to introduce simpler concepts that can be grasped without grasping the normative concepts that we are trying to explicate. Sentimentalists are right to object that if we can say nothing more about praiseworthiness than that it merits praise, we have not got very far. But the rationalists need not immediately agree that we should seek reductive explications that include only simpler concepts, and only non-normative concepts. For if we can explain one normative concept through accounts that introduce several others, we may say something informative about the connexions between different concepts, without eliminating normative terms. Rationalists might reasonably have pointed out that the sentimentalists overlook this third option beside mere synonymies and reductions. 
- But even if Balguy’s account is merely synonymous, it is still informative. For if it is correct, it shows that being praised is not the same as being worthy of praise, and hence it refutes an explication that reduces being worthy of praise to being praised. Moreover, since the recognition of a justifying reason includes the recognition of something deserving approval, it is different from a feeling of approval.¹⁵ If we identify it with a feeling of approval, we obscure the basis on which we approve. We approve an action because we see a good justifying reason for it, not because we have a feeling of approval.¹⁶ 
- If we distinguish justifying reasons from feelings of approval, we can ask whether the recognition of a justifying reason for doing x is sufficient for being motivated to do x. Hutcheson’s answer to this question is Yes, since he identifies the reason with the feeling of approval. Balguy is free to answer No, since his account of justifying reasons allows a possible gap between recognizing the reasons and being moved to act on them. But he answers Yes; in his view, action follows approval, and approval follows recognition of justifying reasons.¹⁷ 
- Even if some opposed non-rational impulse might interfere with the normal operation of rational assent, it does not follow that its normal operation depends on a favourable non-rational impulse; it follows only that no interfering impulse is present. Balguy might reasonably observe that we often seem to act on the basis of our belief that we have a good reason to do what we try to do. If Hutcheson replies that we must nonetheless have some further non-rational impulse favouring the rational course of action, why should we agree? Either he argues illegitimately from the absence of interfering impulses to the presence of favouring impulses, or he takes his general anti-rationalist account for granted in order to dismiss apparent counter-examples.
- He rejects sentimentalism
- Though he concedes (without actually agreeing) that the recognition of beauty varies according to different people’s sense of beauty, he denies that the recognition of rightness varies in the same way.¹⁸
- Balguy argues against the conjunction of Hutcheson’s two claims: 
    - To be morally good is to be approved of by the moral sense.
    - The moral sense approves of benevolence. Hence he believes that he refutes Hutcheson if he can show that moral goodness consists in something other than benevolence. One might argue that this objection does not refute Hutcheson’s first claim. But it is difficult to see what he could easily substitute for benevolence. Though the moral sense is not benevolence itself, but an attitude towards benevolence, it is similar to benevolence in being a disinterested pleasure at people’s welfare. This pleasure is the basis for our approval of disinterested concern in others. Hence it is fair of Balguy to attack the conjunction of Hutcheson’s two claims by attacking the second claim. 
- He argues that sometimes we recognize moral goodness in others without ascribing benevolence to them and without exercising our own moral sense. George and Louis produce the same amount of good, but:
    - George does it out of benevolent feelings. George rules over his extended family, whereas Louis rules over complete strangers. In this case, according to Balguy, George acts from his benevolent affection.
    - Louis does it from a sense of honour and duty. Louis acts as he does because it is right, without any particular benevolent feeling (since he does not even know most of the people whom he rules).²¹ In such cases, we not only attribute moral goodness to an agent who has no inclination in favour of it, but we actually attribute greater virtue to the agent who acts on the basis of recognizing rightness, apart from any inclination.²² Hutcheson might disallow such counter-examples on the ground that they violate his internalist constraint on moral judgment. In his view, an attribution of goodness that is not a reaction of approval towards benevolence would not imply the relevant motivation in the judge; hence it could not be moral judgment. Rationalists may choose either of two replies: (1) They might simply deny the internalist constraint, and claim that moral judgment ascribes a property to an agent that may or may not arouse a favourable feeling in the judge. (2) Clarke and Balguy argue that in the normal person, in the absence of interfering factors, recognition of what is rationally required or appropriate produces the appropriate motive. If this is true of the moral judge, we can explain why Hutcheson’s internalist constraint might appear true, even though it is false. For the real connexion between moral judgment and motivation, in the normal person, is not conceptual (part of what it means to be a moral judgment), but it is still necessary; normal rational agents and judges could not be indifferent to moral considerations that present demands of reason. 
- Balguy acknowledges that Hutcheson presents these arguments against voluntarism.³⁸ But he believes that, even if Hutcheson tries to avoid voluntarism, sentimentalism repeats the central errors of voluntarism, and is therefore open to Cudworth’s objections against Hobbes.³⁹ For it seems that a reasonable question can be asked about whether what the moral sense approves is good. In asking this question, we are not asking whether the moral sense approves what it approves. The latter question is easily answered, but the question we want to ask is not so easily answered. 
- Hutcheson’s claims about God provoke a controversy between Balguy, Bayes, and Grove about whether God acts out of rectitude (Balguy), benevolence (Bayes), or wisdom (Grove) (114).
- It would be consistent to agree with Doddridge and Grove about the divine nature against voluntarists and sentimentalists, and still to accept utilitarianism; for one might argue that a perfectly reasonable agent will accept utilitarianism. Cumberland holds that God rationally chooses to promote the common good because this is the reasonable end; and one might defend a parallel claim about utility. Hutcheson’s rationalist opponents, however, deny that practical reason supports utilitarianism; Balguy, Butler, Doddridge, and Price all maintain that practical reason imposes some limits on the pursuit of maximum utility.
- Balguy is sympathetic to Hutcheson’s utilitarianism, though he does not entirely endorse it; but he argues that sentimentalism does not offer a satisfactory defence of utilitarianism. Balguy argues that utilitarian benevolence, a completely impartial commitment to maximizing the general good, is not simply the result of our particular passions of benevolence. Not only do sentimentalism and utilitarianism fail to support each other; they actually conflict. 
- Balguy does not object to Hutcheson’s account of the content of utilitarianism. In particular, he does not distinguish Cumberland’s conception of the common good of rational beings from Hutcheson’s maximizing conception that allows us harm one person in order to raise the total good. He speaks of a universal good that ‘includes’ the private good of every individual. He might intend to express Cumberland’s conception of a common good, which would require us to aim at the good of every individual, and would prohibit the sacrifice of one individual to another. But it is not clear that Balguy means this. He may mean simply that we calculate the total good by summing the goods and evils of all individuals involved. This way of understanding the universal good is Hutcheson’s way; it does not prohibit, but even requires, the sacrifice of some people’s good as a means to a higher total. Balguy does not say why this is a reasonable end for morality.
- In recognizing a rational principle of benevolence Balguy agrees with Clarke, who regards benevolence as one aspect of what is fit and right. He describes the pursuit of universal good as the ‘primary dictate’ of right reason. We might assume that the primary dictate is the supreme principle, from which other principles are derived or to which they are subordinate. This, however, is not Clarke’s view. Clarke claims that our moral convictions are immediate; they rely on features of a specific situation itself, rather than on calculations, direct or indirect, about consequences. Similarly, Balguy believes that relations of fitness are not confined to the utilitarian principle, and that they impose non-utilitarian requirements.
A solitary agent’s reasonable treatment of his own needs and desires would display moral virtue, even if no one else stood to benefit.⁶⁰ 
- Balguy takes a non-utilitarian position on divine goodness and rectitude. Against Hutcheson and Bayes, he affirms that God is moved by other considerations besides benevolence. These include the intrinsic beauty of the universe, and considerations of justice and retribution that cannot be reduced to utility. God seeks a proportion between virtue and happiness that is distinct from a desire to maximize utility. Balguy does not consider how far these principles are compatible with utility, or how one ought to resolve conflicts between them. He assumes that justice guides God to act in ways that do not maximize universal happiness; that is why Bayes criticizes him for implying that God cannot be relied on to pursue the primary aim of maximizing our happiness. 
- Clarke sometimes seems to rely on a purely conceptual connexion; he suggests that the concept of a benefactor makes gratitude a fit response, because a benefactor is one who benefits in a way that makes gratitude appropriate.⁶² This explanation makes our judgments about fitness dependent on prior judgments about rightness or appropriateness, and so it does not help us to identify obligations independent of utility; the utilitarian simply needs to say that if gratitude is not appropriate on utilitarian grounds, the person who has conferred a benefit is not a real benefactor.
Balguy endorses Clarke’s appeal to fitnesses, and takes these fitnesses to be relative to the nature and circumstances of things.⁶³ He sometimes tries to do better than Clarke’s purely conceptual explanation of fitness. He suggests that the Golden Rule suggests a principle of fitness that makes it fit to relieve a person in distress. Relief of distress fits the person in distress because he is similar to me in the relevant respects, and I would think it reasonable for someone to help me in distress.⁶⁴ What is fit for a human being depends on the nature of human beings in contrast to non-rational animals.⁶⁵ 
- Rationalism is important for Balguy because it allows him to explain how God is good, and why we can expect the moral demands of God to be morally right. Since basic moral principles are accessible to reason, and since a rational agent who grasps these principles will also be moved to act on them, God, being a rational agent, knows basic moral principles and acts on them. Being wise and just, God also wants us to act on them; hence God enjoins action on the principles that commend themselves to natural reason.
- But he is justified in examining the Deist view that rational morality is all that Christianity has to offer.⁶ To refute the Deist, Balguy considers someone who is benevolent, but at first does not believe in God or an afterlife. He argues that if such an agent becomes convinced of the truths he previously rejected, we have no reason to suppose that his benevolent impulses will thereby be weakened.⁷ The Deist gives no reason for believing that the motives produced by divine sanctions necessarily undermine the motive of benevolence.





#                  Difficulties

- Clarke and Balguy agree with Parker’s conception of happiness (His argument against Greek Moralists assumes a broadly hedonistic conception of happiness, which leads him to misunderstand the Stoic and the Aristotelian and Platonic position), and hence with his assertion that Greek moral philosophy cannot assure the appropriate connexion between virtue and happiness.⁴²
- This claim must be qualified to recognize a possibility that Balguy mentions: the will may exercise its capacity to rebel against the conclusion that reasonably necessarily assents to. Like Clarke, he allows this possibility, but he has some difficulty in explaining it. Though he agrees that the will sometimes rebels against rational assent, he still assumes that rational assent is normally suffciient for action, without any further approval by the will. 
- Balguy rejects Shaftesbury’s objection—as Balguy conceives it—to orthodox Christianity. According to Balguy’s account of Shaftesbury, the appeal to divine sanctions threatens morality, because it encourages us to act on self-interest rather than benevolence.⁴ This account does not seem to do justice to Shaftesbury’s position.⁵ According to Shaftesbury, some Christian opponents of ‘enthusiasm’ and the self-forgetful love of God react too strongly, by appealing exclusively to rational calculation of rewards and punishments. This attitude to disinterested motives seems to Shaftesbury to destroy morality, including Christian morality. But he does not deny that an appeal to rewards and punishments, in a secondary place, is permissible and appropriate. 
- On the one hand, his answer to the Deist presupposes that virtuous motives and self-interested motives may coincide in a virtuous person.⁸ On the other hand, he seems to deny that we could remain virtuous if we begin to do virtuous actions on self-interested motives, in addition to the properly virtuous motives that we already have.⁹ For he argues that the presence of a self-interested motive subtracts from the worth of the action to the extent that it influences the agent. In saying this Balguy seems to undermine his answer to Deism. Perhaps this objection is too hasty. Balguy does not believe that human beings in their present condition are capable of the complete disinterestedness that would constitute perfect virtue and that belongs only to God. Perhaps, then, he could reply to Shaftesbury that divine sanctions simply replace some previous self-interested motive that concurred with benevolence. But it is difficult to make this claim seem plausible. The belief in divine sanctions seems to make the motive of self-interest stronger than it was before, so that, if we follow Balguy’s rule, we must apparently subtract its increased force from the estimate of the virtue of the agent. 
- He defends his principle of subtraction by offering two examples. (1) A mother rescues her drowning child ‘in the transports of her fear, grief, and tenderness’. (2) A brave soldier is challenged to a duel without having given any offence, but ‘conscientiously and resolutely refuses to fight’ despite ‘many vile reproaches, insults, and outrages’ (FMG ii 35 = TMT 193).
In Balguy’s view, the virtue and moral merit of the two actions ‘will bear no comparison’;
the second action is clearly superior to the first on these points.
But these examples do not support the principle of subtraction. The mother in the first example acts solely from the motives that he mentions, whereas the soldier in the second example does not act simply from shame, or fear of punishment, in refusing to fight a duel. If, therefore, the mother lacked these specific emotions, no rational convictions would move her to save her child. If that is the intended description of the case, our comparative judgment rests on the mother’s lack of these rational convictions, not on the soldier’s lack of non-rational incentives. Hence our judgment does not support the principle of subtraction.
- To justify the principle of subtraction, we would need to suppose that both the soldier and the mother have an equal tendency to act ‘conscientiously and resolutely’, and that they differ only insofar as the mother’s instinct agrees with her conscientious motive and the soldier’s instinct disagrees with it. But if we describe the example in this way, is Balguy’s judgment right? The soldier’s action may be a clearer proof of his moral character, but his action seems to have no more merit than the mother’s.