- An argument for this indirect benevolence is presented and defended more fully by Berkeley in his sermon, ‘Passive Obedience’.²² The point of this sermon is to oppose a doctrine of limited obedience to authority. This doctrine is often defended by appeal to a utilitarian argument about the consequences for the public good. Berkeley replies that utilitarian reasoning favours not limited obedience and selective disobedience, but invariable passive obedience. This doctrine does not require us to obey immoral instructions (such as those that the Thirty gave to Socrates); disobedience to these instructions is permissible, as long as we are willing to accept the penalties.²³ Berkeley begins from the belief in laws of nature, and asks how we are to find out what they prescribe. He does not consider the Scholastic appeal to fitness to rational nature or Clarke’s views about fitness.²⁴ He assumes without argument that happiness, understood as pleasure, is the basis for finding good and evil (5). We seek our own happiness; we find it in agreement with the divine will, because it is our eternal interest to agree with God’s eternal will (6). Since God is impartially benevolent, it is in our interest to follow the utilitarian principle that God accepts (6).²⁵ The laws of nature, then, aim at maximizing utility, because that is what God aims at.²⁶ Berkeley agrees with Cumberland’s consequentialist account of the laws of nature,²⁷ but not with Cumberland’s view that it is inherently rational to aim at the common good. Berkeley’s position is more favourable to voluntarism (though without a definite commitment). He does not suggest that we would have any reason to be utilitarians if God’s being a utilitarian did not make it in our interest to share God’s aims.
IfweshareGod’saimofmaximizingutility,wewouldbeill-advisedtobedirectutilitarians, acting on our calculation of the consequences of particular actions. Such calculations are often difficult and fallible, and since different people disagree about their results, direct utilitarianism leads to discord. To avoid this bad effect, we need to be indirect utilitarians, relying on general rules. Hence natural law does not consist only of the single principle of maximizing the good; it also includes the general rules that we are obliged to observe without exception in order to maximize the good (8–12). Since utility requires us to obey them without exception, the fact that in some circumstances observance of them has bad results does not remove our obligation to obey them.²⁸ Berkeley does not suggest (as Hobbes sometimes seems to) that every act of disobedience is likely to lead to the evils of anarchy and should therefore be avoided. But he argues that permission for limited obedience will lead to these evils, and so should be rejected. Loyalty (consisting in passive obedience) is a virtue because of the ‘miseries inseparable from a state of anarchy’ (15–16). Since it would be so difficult to determine case by case whether disobedience would be expedient, we ought to have an invariable rule to be observed without calculation in particular cases (19). On this ground Berkeley rejects any argument to show that our agreement to obey the law is conditional on (say) the good behaviour of the rulers, and so he affirms that even if the rulers behave badly, the duty of obedience remains (23). 









#                  Difficulties

- If Shaftesbury took approval by the moral sense to constitute moral properties, he would undermine his realism and his arguments against voluntarism. He would be subject to the argument that he aims at the theological voluntarists. In his view, we recognize God’s will as morally perfect because we regard moral properties as distinct from what God approves. Similarly, we recognize that someone’s moral sense is right because we believe in moral properties that are distinct from what the moral sense approves. Balguy uses this argument effectively against Hutcheson’s belief in a constitutive relation between the moral sense and moral properties.⁵⁵ But it does not affect Shaftesbury, since he treats the moral sense as a sign of objective moral properties, not as their metaphysical basis. His defenders are right to argue that he does not make moral rightness (the honestum) depend on its being approved. Though Berkeley criticizes him on this point, the criticism rests on misinterpretation.⁵⁶ 
- Hutcheson takes a step that Shaftesbury does not take, by defniing moral goodness as essentially what is approved by the moral sense. He takes the moral sense to be disinterested, and therefore he supposes that he defends Shaftesbury. This interpretation of the moral sense and its relation to moral goodness is also Berkeley’s interpretation of Shaftesbury, and it is the basis for Berkeley’s criticism.⁵⁷ But Hutcheson overlooks the fact that he defends only the motivational part of Shaftesbury’s realist doctrine, and that he undermines the metaphysical part. Balguy points out this consequence of Hutcheson’s modification of Shaftesbury; he shows that Hutcheson’s position exposes him to Shaftesbury’s argument against theological voluntarism.⁵⁸ 