- Argues that Hutcheson’s belief in a moral sense requires him to reject realism and the metaphysical independence of morality. 
- Burnet sometimes maintains an externalist version of rationalism, accepting the second rationalist answer rather than the first. In his view, we can conceive someone making the right moral judgments while lacking the affections that would cause a favourable feeling towards these judgments.⁹ Burnet does not deny the existence or the general correctness of a moral sense, but he denies that it is necessary for making true moral judgments. He argues that we can recognize that an end and an action are reasonable from the moral point of view without thereby having any favourable feeling towards them. 
- - Hutcheson replies that Burnet’s appeal to the reasonableness of one or another end is empty.¹⁰ An end is not reasonable in its own right, but only in relation to some further end for which we have an antecedent desire. Similarly, we cannot judge an end reasonable except relatively to a further desired end. Hence judgments about reasonableness must depend on a further desire; hence we need a moral sense. To show that an end cannot be reasonable in its own right, Hutcheson argues that it is always appropriate to ask ‘What makes it reasonable?’. To say that nothing makes it reasonable, or that it makes itself reasonable, is uninformative. To say what makes it reasonable, we always have to say that it appeals to us on the basis of some further end we care about. In the case of morality, the relevant further end is the public good, which appeals to our moral sense. The mere claim that something is reasonable in itself is an appeal to an alleged brute fact. BurnetandBalguyreplythatsomereasonsmustbetakenasultimate,sincewecannotshow their reasonableness by appeal to further reasons. Similarly (according to Clarke and Burnet) no further reason can be given for accepting a mathematical axiom, but we do not infer that mathematical judgment requires a further contribution from the affections. On the contrary, mathematical judgments consist in recognizing axioms as ultimate reasons and in reasoning in accordance with them. It is equally appropriate to recognize ultimately reasonable moral principles and to judge in accordance with them. If they are ultimately reasonable, no more ultimate reasons can be given to show that they are reasonable; but it doesnotfollowthatwemustappealtosomefurthernon-rationaldesire.BalguyagreesthatifI recognizeamoralprincipleasultimatelyreasonable,Iwillnormallywanttoactinaccordance with it; but he claims that the desire results from the recognition, and does not explain it.¹¹ If a defender of Hutcheson objects that Balguy is appealing to a mere brute fact, not further explained, Balguy might answer that Hutcheson also appeals to a brute fact—a non-rational desire and a tendency to act on that desire. Can we not ask why we should act on that desire? The question ‘Why should I?’ suggests that we are looking for some further reason that Hutcheson fails to provide. In this dispute about brute facts the anti-rationalist complains that the rationalist cannot say why we act on what we see to be ultimately reasonable. The rationalist complains that the anti-rationalist cannot say why we should act on basic non-rational desires for ends. The anti-rationalist, therefore, complains about the rationalist’s failure to provide a motivating reason, whereas the rationalist complains about the anti-rationalist’s failure to provide a normative reason. At first sight, both complaints seem reasonable. Balguy’s discussion shows that Hutcheson’s assumptions about explanation and reasons do not define all the legitimate questions that can be raised. 