Ty- Self-interest conflicts with interest of others
- Rejects the supremacy of reasons based on one’s own good for being moral
- argument Butler urges against Hobbes: the claim that we do everything as a means to our own satisfaction does not explain why we find our satisfaction where we do; contrary to the egoist view, our finding satisfaction in getting x presupposes a desire for x itself, which explains why we get the satisfaction in x rather than y.
- Holistic Naturalism (Human nature os a system of some tendencies of people. But not all tendencies are part of human nature) is true
- The Naturalism is true. Human functionis to be guided by practical reason
- In unself i sh concern A wants to do x for B, simply because B wants x done or because it would be better for B, not because A gains any further benef i t from doing x. A shows this concern for B if A moves to one side to avoid walking over B’s gouty toes, when A has nothing else to gain by doing this. This is the unself i sh sentiment whose reality Butler defend against the psychological egoism of Hobbes
- Butler distinguishes the respect in which illness and health are equally natural from the respect in which health is more natural than illness.
- Non-eudamonism moralism is true: happiness is not needed for a sufficient justification of virtue.
- Butler argues that the principle of self-love is not supreme, but is subordinate to conscience. Self-love and conscience are distinct superior principles, but conscience is supreme. He therefore denies that they are equally ultimate principles
- Rejects this primacy of self-love. 
- Butler says that the rational pursuit of happiness gives us the reason that impartial justice is even more rational that pursuit of happiness
- Rejects eudaemonism
- The distinction between:
    - Power - the strength of desires - Plato's non-ration parts of the soul. Humean deliberation.
    - Authority - the rational weight of desires - Plato's rational parts of the soul. Non-humean deliberation.
- Butler revived Aristotelian view that human nature constitutes a system, rather than a collection of desires
- About indirect consequentialism:Butler suggests that in the context of reflexion—‘in a cool hour’, as he puts it—we can appropriately ask questions that ought not to intrude into immediate deliberation.
- Protests against the view that egoism is the only safe alternative to enthusiasm.
- Butler maintains the connexion asserted by Suarez about the relation of the immutability of morality and the naturalist account of moral properties
- Butler’s objection that utilitarianism allows unfair treatment of one person simply for the benefti of others.²⁵
- Clarke does not point out the possibility of deriving a principle of benevolence from the obligation to prudence combined with the obligation to equity.³⁹ If we rationally wish to promote our own interest, and we recognize that what is rational for us to want for ourselves is equally rational for others to want for themselves, an appeal to equity justifeis the extension of benevolence to everyone. Clarke’s explicit argument appeals to the principle of equity to justify universal benevolence, but he does not appeal to the rationality of prudence. This may be because he treats the principle of prudence as derivative from other duties, not as a rational principle in its own right. Here Butler improves on him.⁴⁰ 
- Clarke does not reject this naturalist account of the basis of moral obligations. In his discussion of benevolence and universal love, he frist offers an explanation that relies on the inherent fitness of seeking the greater good, but then, as we saw, he appeals to Stoic views on nature and conciliation.⁶⁷ These are naturalist views, and Clarke speaks here of the natural constitution and needs of human beings. He does not see that this account of moral obligations conflicts with his claims about the inherent fitness of certain actions. Butler contrasts a naturalist position with the a priori rationalism of Clarke. Butler’s naturalism is all the more plausible in the light of Clarke’s tendency to rely on it.⁶⁸  
- Butler believes Clarke goes too far in rejecting naturalism; the restoration of some aspects of traditional naturalism is Butler’s answer to sentimentalism. 
- If moral reasons are not derived from self-interest, they must provide suffciient reasons by themselves, without reference to any more ultimate reasons. Our recognition, for instance, that this action promotes the public good must provide—in conjunction with the relevant desire—a reason for doing it, without appeal to any further self-interested consideration. But a simple desire for the good of others for their own sake does not make someone morally good. Even if such a desire is entirely non-self-regarding, we could have it without approving of our action. It is characteristic of a morally good person, however, to approve of this desire, whether in himself or in someone else; that is the essentially reflexive element of morality. To make a moral judgment on an action is not simply to add another desire to our initial desire to do the action; it is to express the view that this desire is right and appropriate for an agent in these circumstances. A rationalist might accept these arguments. If promotion of the public good is a sufficient justification and admits no further justification, perhaps reason recognizes this justification.²⁷ Similarly, the reflexive character of moral judgment may result from rational recognition of the appropriate desire.²⁸ Butler and Reid agree with Hutcheson on the reflexive character of moral judgment. But they do not infer that moral judgments are not a product of reason.
- Butler’s sermons are intended ‘to explain what is meant by the nature of man, when it is said that virtue consists in following, and vice in deviating from it; and by explaining to show that the assertion is true’ (P13). He says that this claim about nature is the view of the ancient moralists; they believe that vice is ‘more contrary’ to human nature than torture and death are.¹ In the comparative ‘more contrary’ Butler suggests that torture and death are to some degree contrary to nature.² He therefore attributes to the ancients a doctrine of degrees of naturalness, and hence a graded conception of nature, according to which torture and death are indeed contrary to nature, but less contrary than vice is. These remarks about the ancients recall the Stoics, and especially passages in Cicero that assume a graded conception of nature.³ 
- A correct account of human nature, in Butler’s view, not only vindicates the truth and importance of Stoic naturalism, but also supports it against the three main rival positions that Butler considers: extreme rationalism, sentimentalism, and Hobbesian egoism 
- Many of Butler’s claims about nature might be taken to support a sentimentalist account of morality. In his first sermon he endorses Hutcheson’s claim that human nature includes not only self-interested but also moral attitudes. He mentions benevolence (i 6), particular passions (i 7), and reflexion (i 8). The principle of reflexion is the principle by which we approve or disapprove of our passions, propensions, and actions; and Butler identifies this principle with conscience.¹² He claims, then, that the sentimentalist is right about the extent of human motives, against Hobbes’s egoism.¹³ He disagrees about the character of our moral attitudes, rejecting Hutcheson’s view that they consist in a non-rational moral sense. But on other points we might suppose that he agrees with Hutcheson. It is not surprising that Hutcheson endorses some of Butler’s arguments, and in his later work takes the moral sense to incorporate some of the features of conscience, as Butler conceives it.¹⁴
- But despite these points of agreement with Hutcheson, Butler believes that the sentimentalists offer an inadequate conception of human nature. If human nature were simply a collection of the motives and dispositions recognized by sentimentalists, Hutcheson would be right.¹⁵ But Butler rejects this account of human nature.
- In Butler’s view, the sentimentalists are wrong to hold the view that the one who lacks a strong preference to bea virtuous also has no reason to be virtuous, because their account of human nature is incomplete.
- Butler’s naturalism implies that moral truths cannot be proved without reference to facts about human nature: He compares Clarke’s rationalism with his own naturalism.²⁰ He grants that the rationalist argument ‘seems the most direct formal proof, and in some respects the least liable to cavil and dispute’. The ‘seems’ and ‘in some respects’ mark possible reservations. If it were intuitively certain that, for instance, benefaction requires gratitude, that would indeed be a direct formal proof, and it would put the moral principle beyond cavil and dispute. But Clarke’s alleged proof of such principles does not seem convincing enough to exclude cavil and dispute.
- Butler distinguishes 3 senses of nature and netural:
    - in accordance with some natural impulse or other
    - in accordance with one’s strongest natural impulse. These two senses capture Hobbes’s appeals to nature. Hobbes looks for an account of human nature that identifeis the basic moving forces that explain all the varied and complex movements and tendencies of a human being. Morality, in his view, depends on facts about human nature, but it is not natural. Hutcheson’s naturalism also relies on these two senses of ‘natural’. In his view, virtue is natural because it is based on one of our natural sentiments, benevolence, and therefore excites the approval of the moral sense. Wollaston assumes the same sense of ‘natural’ in criticizing sentimentalist appeals to the natural. 
    - connexion between nature and system. The third sense of ‘natural’ relies on a teleological conception of a system and its needs. To apply this pattern directly to human beings, we have to assume that they are also artifacts designed for some purpose. Butler certainly believes that human beings are designed by God. We can say both:
        - that the nature of a watch is to tell the time. It is a claim about the system as a whole; its different bits and pieces constitute some organized whole in which they have a particular part to play
        - that it is natural for watches to run fast or slow, break down, etc. The second of these statements fits the first two senses of nature just described. But the first fits neither of them exactly. The watch goes against its nature when it is (as we say) ‘out of order’. 
- His ethical argument does not rely directly on the theological premiss about God and its design; and so he tries to explain his claims about nature and system without appeal to design.²⁹ 
- If we treat something as a system rather than simply a collection, we imply that its different traits achieve results that are not only consistent, but also harmonious and mutually co-operative. Consistency requires that different traits do not regularly conflict and do not undermine one another. Harmony requires them to co-exist in such a way that their results support one another. Co-operation requires more active steps to achieve harmony, so that one trait not only supports or facilitates another, but strengthens and helps it. In claiming that human beings have a nature, Butler claims that we constitute systems of this sort. We discover our nature by looking at a human being to see how the different elements constitute a single system. We grasp the system in human nature not by looking at the several passions and motives in themselves, but from considering their relations.³⁰ 
- To see that human nature is a system, we need to understand the role of superior principles in our action; this is the feature of human nature that sentimentalists have left out.³¹ - Butler claims that ‘reflexion’ or ‘conscience’ is a superior principle in human nature. If we simply treat it as one motive among others, we ignore its superiority. Even if we were to claim, falsely, that it is always or usually our dominant motive, we would not have recognized its superiority. We have to acknowledge a superior principle as having authority, and not simply strength.
- Butler introduces two claims about superior principles: (1) Human nature includes superior principles, those that rely on authority rather than strength. (2) Human nature is a system insofar as it is governed by superior principles. The second of these claims seems to go beyond the first. Since superiority does not imply greater strength, our motives might include superior principles that do not govern us, and we might be inclined to say that they ought not to govern us because they make our lives chaotic; the mere fact that they claim authority does not show that we ought to listen to their claim. But though these are two distinct claims about superior principles, Butler takes them to be closely connected;
he believes that once we understand what superior principles are, we also see that we act in accordance with our needs as whole systems only insofar as we act in accordance with superior principles.
Butler’s diagnosis of the error of the sentimentalists shows that his conclusion is not to be treated as an analytic truth; the meaning of ‘natural’ or ‘in accordance with our nature’ is not to be given by ‘in accordance with a superior principle’. Rather, when we understand the meaning of ‘in accordance with nature’ and of ‘superior principle’, we recognize the synthetic truth that acting on superior principles is in accordance with nature. To act in accordance with nature is to act in accord with the requirements of ourselves as whole systems. 
- Butler connects this naturalism with belief in natural law. He follows Stoic precedents, by recalling the passage in De Officiis that suggests the graded conception of nature.³³ Both Cicero and Butler assume that the law of nature is not simply about rational agents, but also available to rational agents. 
- Though Butler does not mention natural law, he introduces it, as Clarke does, by appeal to St Paul’s claim that human beings are by nature a law to themselves (Rm. 2:15).³⁴ Aquinas cites this passage as a Scriptural warrant for including a doctrine of natural law in Christian moral theology. Luther and Calvin, among many others, agree with Aquinas.³⁵
- Butler agrees with them in taking St Paul to claim both that rational agents are a law to themselves and that conscience is the means of recognizing the content of the law.³⁶ We are by nature a law to ourselves because of two connexions between law and nature: (1) It is part of our nature to be guided by law, since guidance by law is one of our natural principles. (2) In being guided by law, we act in accordance with our nature. Butler sees these connexions between law and nature because he identifeis guidance by law with acting on superior principles. A proper understanding of our nature shows that it is natural to us to act on superior principles. If we act on superior principles, we are guided by conscience, and the actions required by conscience are those that accord with our nature. 
- Contrary to Shaftesbury, he takes the authority of conscience or reflexion to give us a sufficient reason for preferring morality, irrespective of any beliefs about rewards or punishments.
- Once we recognize structure of human nature, we can see that morality conforms to this structure.
- This form of naturalist argument helps us to decide whether rationalism and naturalism are compatible. Butler argues for two claims: 
    - Living virtuously accords with human nature. He is right to say that a rationalist might agree with the first claim, and that therefore rationalism and naturalism are complementary. 
    - To live virtuously is to live in accord with human nature. But his second claim conflicts with rationalism, because it implies that morality is mutable in ways in which Clarke seems to deny. Even though morality is not mutable in relation to our feelings of sympathy (as Hutcheson supposes), it is mutable (according to Butler) in relation to human nature.
- Butler explains his conception of superiority by appeal to the difference between mere power or strength and authority. Our reason for doing x rather than y is our belief that y is better than x, not simply that we feel like doing y rather than x. We decide on the basis of strength when we choose, e.g., between red wine and white wine, or we decide to go to one film rather than another; in that case we ask ‘Which do I prefer?’. In other cases, however, we deliberate by considering the merits of different courses of action, not by registering our preferences.
- Butler’s argument for the distinction between power and authority rejects Hobbes’s attempt to reduce practical reason and deliberation to a contest of countervailing psychological forces.⁴ Hobbes’s analysis dissolves the apparent distinction between the strength of desires and the weight of reasons. Butler replies, quite reasonably, that a plausible account of desire and deliberation cannot do without this distinction. If Hobbes were right, we could not decide after refelxion on our action that we have done what we most wanted to do, but failed to do what we had the best reason to do. Since we sometimes reach this conclusion on our actions, Hobbes’s analysis is inadequate. But how far beyond Hobbes does Butler’s distinction take us? We might argue that we acknowledge the difference between power and authority even if we allow only internal reasons. Perhaps some desires are based on the weight of reasons rather than mere strength of desires; but might the weight of reasons not be derived from desires? Perhaps we have reason to satisfy one occurrent desire over another if and only if the satisfaction of the first desire promotes the satisfaction of more of our desires in the long run. In choosing between our occurrent desires we are moved by the weight of reasons, but the reasons themselves are derived from the comparative strength of our different desires, not from any external standard. This argument does not eliminate external reasons. The proposed principle for judging between occurrent desires seems to be open to reasonable doubt. For if I consider the overall satisfaction of my desires in the long run, I may conclude that I have no good reason to satisfy some of them in accordance with their strength. I may, for instance, see that I have reason to acquire a desire for x and to eliminate a desire for y, because I take x to be better than y. If I foresee that it will take me some time to carry out this change in my desires, I may foresee that for a long time my desire for y will be stronger than I think it ought to be and my desire for x will be weaker. If I were to be guided by the comparative strength of my desires during this time, I would pay more attention than I should to the desire I am trying to eliminate, and less attention than I should to the desire I am trying to acquire or strengthen. The purely ‘internal’ principle of satisfying my stronger long-term desires is itself open to rational criticism. This argument does not show that we have external reasons, but only that we deliberate on the assumption that we have external reasons. In criticizing our actual and predicted desires, we assume that we can rely on reasons for preferring one to another; and we take these reasons to be distinct from any facts about actual or predicted preferences. If there are no external reasons, or none that we can reasonably believe we have found, our deliberation cannot work in the way we suppose it works. To vindicate our conception of deliberation, we need to show that we have reasons of the sort that we think we rely on. Butler’s argument about power and authority, therefore, answers Hobbes by showing that we take ourselves to be open to external reasons. It shows that a plausible account of deliberation, correcting Hobbes’s attempt to reduce deliberation to an interplay of psychological forces, requires us to recognize reasons that are not reducible to facts about the satisfaction of actual or predicted desires. In defending this conclusion, Butler highlights an important feature of deliberation and practical reason. His point is not new; he makes explicit a point that is presupposed by the Aristotelian and Scholastic conception. Reid makes clear the significance of Butler’s argument. 
- Butler’s conception of a superior principle separates him not only from Hobbes, but also from the sentimentalists. In distinguishing authority from strength, he grasps a point that Hutcheson blurs in his discussion of justifying and exciting reasons. Awareness of a justifying reason, in Hutcheson’s view, is simply the awareness, arising from reflexion, of a feeling of approval of the action or person that we have refelcted on.⁵ - Hutcheson’s view is therefore rather similar to Frankfurt’s view about second-order desires, in ‘Freedom’. Butler’s criticism is similar to the objections by those critics of Frankfurt (e.g., Watson, ‘Agency’) who insist on evaluation as opposed to mere higher-order desires. Cf. §639 on Hutcheson.
- Balguy notices this weakness in the sentimentalist view, insisting that merit or praiseworthiness is not what is approved, but what deserves approval.⁶ Butler generalizes and strengthens Balguy’s objections. He sees that the awareness of merit may not coincide with any inclination to do what we regard as having greater merit. If we are guided by authority, we are looking for the best reasons to act, not simply trying to find which actions excite our sentiment of prospective approval. In claiming that human nature includes government by superior principles, Butler reasserts the Aristotelian claim that a human being is a rational agent who deliberates and chooses on the basis of external reasons. 
- To explain why we must recognize superior principles, Butler offers a sort of transcendental argument, seeking to show that they are necessary for the recognition of something that we cannot rationally refuse to recognize. (A transcendental argument says roughly: (1) We cannot have sufficient reason to give up p. (2) We cannot accept p without accepting q. (3) Therefore we must accept q. The exact sense of the modal terms in these claims needs quite a bit of explanation) We could not have reason to give up the belief that some things deserve approval more than others; for it would be absurd to believe that any two actions that a human being can do (and are therefore in accordance with nature in either of the frist two senses) equally deserve approval. He claims that we face this absurd result if we do not recognize a claim to superiority and authority distinct from the strength of a desire. If we recognize no superior principles, we lose any basis for drawing distinctions between the worst and the best actions. If I freely do x, I act on my strongest desire for x; if strength is the only basis for approval, I must approve any action that anyone does; but clearly I do not. If we do not distinguish authority from strength, we cannot explain why we should think it is better to do x rather than y, or that there is reason to do x rather than y, in cases where x and y are equally natural in the first two senses. Butler’s transcendental argument draws our attention to the absurdity of abandoning normative judgments altogether.⁸ 
- If we do not believe that superior principles guide action, we have no reason to suppose that they guide belief; we must abandon the formation of beliefs on the basis of better reasons. In that case, we have to explain, as the Greek Sceptics try to explain, how we can live simply on the basis of appearances. The Stoics argue that the Sceptical position leads to ‘inaction’ (apraxia).⁹ The sources do not always make it clear what the Stoics think the Sceptic is incapable of. But the most plausible Stoic argument points out that though the Sceptic is capable of goal-directed movement, as a non-rational animal is, Scepticism removes the possibility of acting on reasons. That is why Scepticism makes a human life impossible, so that Sceptics are mistaken in claiming to follow everyday life. The Stoics are urging the absurdity, as Butler puts it, of equal approval and disapproval of any two actions. 
- - If we do not believe that superior principles guide action, we have no reason to suppose that they guide belief; we must abandon the formation of beliefs on the basis of better reasons. In that case, we have to explain, as the Greek Sceptics try to explain, how we can live simply on the basis of appearances. The Stoics argue that the Sceptical position leads to ‘inaction’ (apraxia).⁹ The sources do not always make it clear what the Stoics think the Sceptic is incapable of. But the most plausible Stoic argument points out that though the Sceptic is capable of goal-directed movement, as a non-rational animal is, Scepticism removes the possibility of acting on reasons. That is why Scepticism makes a human life impossible, so that Sceptics are mistaken in claiming to follow everyday life. The Stoics are urging the absurdity, as Butler puts it, of equal approval and disapproval of any two actions. One passage in Sextus considers this Stoic use of Butler’s argument about absurdity. The dogmatists argue that if a tyrant threatens the Sceptic with a choice between doing something evil and being killed, then either the Sceptic will refuse to do the evil action or he will do as he is told to avoid torture. In either case he will show that he thinks one course of action better than another, and will assent on the basis of that conviction (Sextus, M xi 164).¹⁰ Sextus answers that the Sceptic does not make up his mind by considering the goodness or badness of what he does; he simply follows the appearance that strikes him more strongly. The Stoics need not deny that this sort of response is logically possible. They might reasonably urge that it is nonetheless ‘absurd’, as Butler puts it, because it deprives the Sceptic of the resources that everyone uses to decide such cases. The Sceptic will have to go in one direction or the other without the benefit of the evaluative comparison that we normally rely on. If it is part of a human life to be capable of acting on evaluative comparisons that may alter the strength of our desires, the Sceptic deprives us of a human life. This dispute between Stoics and Sceptics supports Butler’s claim that we cannot abandon the distinction between power and authority in our choices. 
- Butler applies his claims about nature, system, and superior principles to reasonable self-love.¹¹ He argues that self-love is a superior principle distinct from particular passions, and that it is natural to act in accord with self-love. Self-love is a superior principle, requiring us to consider ourselves as whole selves rather than mere sequences of impulses.
- To show that self-love is a superior principle, Butler distinguishes it from the particular passionsthatpursuespecificexternalobjects.Apassionpursuesitsobjects‘withoutdistinction of the means by which they are to be obtained’ (ii 13). This may lead to a confilct between two appetites in cases where the objects of one ‘cannot be obtained without manifest injury to others’ (ii 13). Reflexion decides in favour of one course of action rather than the other, by considering which is better. This refelxion expresses rational self-love, insofar as it expresses our conception of ourselves as more than a collection of episodes of desire.
- This refelxion expresses rational self-love, insofar as it expresses our conception of ourselves as more than a collection of episodes of desire. The fact that satisfaction of one desire conflicts with satisfaction of another would not interest us if we did not care about the joint product of satisfying the two desires. We are temporally extended selves, and these selves partly consist in our plans for ourselves; hence we are concerned about the different aspects of ourselves in the present, and about their development in the future. Self-love differs from particular passions in being concerned with the self as a continuant that includes a number of affections. To express this self I have to recognize reasons to make decisions that conflict with one or another present passion, and I have to recognize the possibility of conflict between the weight of reasons and the strength of particular impulses. (If we are psychological egoists, we will regard this possibility as purely logical; but we still must recognize Butler’s distinction. )
- Butler assumes that if we were guided exclusively by strength, we would satisfy particular passions without pursuing our own interests. None of the particular passions provides us with a view of what our whole self needs. Since we regard ourselves as whole selves, not just as collections of passions and desires, we must evaluate one passion against another, to see whether the satisfaction of one will damage our whole selves. Since we cannot secure our interests as extended selves if we simply rely on the comparative strength of desires that we register at a particular time, we must consider not only what we happen to care about most now, but also what our future interest requires. If we recognize ourselves as something more than collections of passions, and hence as having concerns that go beyond the satisfaction of this particular desire now, we must acknowledge superior principles that rely on authority rather than mere strength. 
- To see what Butler assumes about the connexion between self-interest and superiority, we may ask what would follow if they were not connected.¹³ Two of his assumptions can be identifeid if we consider some logically possible alternatives that Butler ignores: 
    - Suppose that we had some particular passion that was magically correlated with our good as whole selves, so that whatever this passion favoured would coincide with what a rational and well-informed bystander would say was best for us. In that case we would not need any superior principle to make our particular choices. Butler assumes that our situation is non-magical in this respect. 
    - Suppose that our superior principles were totally incompetent, so that we never gave ourselves the practical advice that a rational bystander would give us, and we never took the view of our previous conduct that a rational bystander would take. If we noticed that things were going badly in this way, we might be well advised to give up acting on superior principles. Butler assumes that we do not suffer such gross incompetence. 
- Though Butler does not discuss either of these imaginary situations, they actually support his claims about superior principles. For how could we discover the magical success of some particular passion, or the gross incompetence of our superior principles, without some exercise of the sort of reasoning that belongs to superior principles? If we are even to discover the limitations of our superior principles, we must recognize their authority. 
- When we act in accord with reasons applying to us as whole selves, we act in accord with our nature. These reasons are external, since they depend on facts about our nature, not on facts about our desire to act in accord with our nature. On this point Butler commits himself to the conception of reasons that is rejected by Hobbes and the sentimentalists. 
- This argument relies on Butler’s third sense of ‘nature’, since it claims that we act naturally in acting on the reasons that apply to us as whole selves. It is reasonable to identify our nature with the nature and essential characteristics of our selves, taking our selves to be extended, including a number of desires, and embodying some concern for a rational ordering of particular desires. According to this conception of human nature, being a rational agent of the sort who attends to rational self-love is part of the nature of a human being. If we denied this, we would be neglecting the systematic element in human nature.¹⁴ If we were to neglect the role of superior principles, we would be thinking of a human being as a mere collection of episodes of desire and satisfaction; whatever we described in such terms would not be human agency or human nature. 
- Butler’s argument is clearer if we distinguish two points that we learn from consideration of rational self-love (Though we derive both these points from considering the fact that self-love takes a holistic point of view on the agent, they are distinct points. If we could recognize that we care about ourselves as whole systems, but we could not think of what to do to promote our interests as whole systems, we would learn that we have a nature without learning what sort of principle we must follow in order to act naturally. If we could recognize that self-love aims at our interest as whole systems, but we supposed that it is deluded in assuming that we are whole systems, then we would also have failed to find a natural course of action.¹⁶ We must agree that we learn both things about self-love, in order to accept Butler’s argument to show that it is natural to act on self-love. ):
    - The attitude of rational self-love shows us that we regard a rational agent as having a nature in Butler’s third sense, because a rational agent is composed of a system of desires and aims extending across time, and is not merely a collection. 
    - This same attitude shows us that it is natural to act on this superior principle. 
- Self-love does not create our nature, as though it were true only from the point of view of self-love that we have a nature. Nor is it purely external to our nature, in the way that someone else’s practical reason might be. If I think about how to achieve your interest, I think of you as a system independently of my reflexion on your interest. But I do not think of myself in the same way. Part of the system that I discover in myself through the exercise of practical reason in my own interest is the fact that my nature includes concern for myself and my interest. Among the various elements of my nature that rational self-love considers is itself. This account of self-love captures a Stoic view about the relation of nature to practical reason. When the Stoics speak of living ‘in accord with nature’, and claim that reason allows us to do this, they mean that reason is an ‘artificer of impulse’;¹⁷ its task is to arrange and to regulate impulses that are natural (in Butler’s first two senses) so that they achieve a system, and so reveal that we have a nature (in Butler’s third sense).
- Correct self-love does not create naturalness, but results from my discovery of it; I discover it, by discovering its impact on the self as a whole.¹⁸ 
- One might dispute Butler’s claim to have proved that one ought to follow self-love over particular passions. Even if one granted that it is unnatural to violate self-love, why does that make it wrong? These questions will seem reasonable from a sentimentalist point of view; for, according to Hutcheson and Hume, I have no overriding reason to do x unless my strongest desire is to do x or for something to which doing x is a means. Butler answers this doubt about his argument by appealing to the distinction between authority and power. Once we recognize that we rely on this distinction, we see that the question about what we ought to do is to be answered by fniding what we have an authoritative reason to do, not by comparing the strength of our desires. The authoritative reason comes from self-love.¹⁹ 
Still, recognition of the natural character (in the third sense) of prudent action is practically relevant. I recognize that it is reasonable to care about my longer-term interest even when it conflicts with my desire for some more immediate satisfaction. But what is reasonable about it? A mere preference for deferred satisfaction or a groundless preference for satisfaction twenty years from now over satisfaction two years from now does not by itself seem reasonable. When we refelct more carefully, we discover that the reasonable action is the one that fulflis the desires and needs of myself as a whole; it is because I extend into the future, not because there is something inherently better about delayed satisfaction, that it is sometimes reasonable to delay satisfaction. Though it might not have been obvious to me from the start that I care about my nature and about the naturalness of my action, refelxion on familiar cases of prudence makes it clear to me that I have good reason to care about naturalness—indeed that naturalness is the source of prudential rationality. This discovery helps us to understand the character of prudence; Butler also claims that it helps us to understand the character of morality, and helps us to see why we have reason to follow conscience when it prescribes the morally right course of action. 
- we might say that if self-love is the only superior principle, Hobbes’s psychological hedonism is vindicated, even if not for Hobbes’s reasons. Butler replies that, even if self-love is the only superior principle, Hobbes’s psychological hedonism is false. 
- Hobbes makes four claims: (1) Every action of mine is motivated by the prospect of my pleasure. (2) Self-love seeks my maximum pleasure. (3) Every action is motivated by self-love.²⁰ (4) Hence every action is motivated by concern for my maximum pleasure. These claims are to some extent independent. We could accept the third, as a eudaemonist does, without necessarily being hedonists and accepting the fourth. And we could agree that some desire for pleasure always moves us, without agreeing that the desire to maximize our pleasure always overrides any other desire. 
- Butler, however, does not seem to see that these claims are independent. He seems to argue against Hobbes as though the refutation of hedonism implied the refutation of the whole Hobbesian position. This is perhaps a fair ad hominem reply to Hobbes, who does not see that different parts of his position need independent defences. Still, Butler’s failure to see the different questions involved in a discussion of Hobbesian egoism exposes a weakness, as we will see later, in his own views about self-love. 
- Butler seems to think that Hobbes’s hedonist thesis is not only empirically false, but logically impossible. In Butler’s view, each ‘particular passion’—hunger, thirst, revenge, gratitude, and so on—aims at its proper object (being fed, having thirst relieved, etc.), not at the pleasure that results from achieving the object. We take pleasure in achieving the object in question, but we would not get this pleasure unless we desired the object apart from any prospect of pleasure.²¹ If, then, I take pleasure, in x, there must be some feature F of x such that (1) I take pleasure in x qua F, and (2) my desiring x qua F precedes and explains my taking pleasure in x. Hence I am pleased, for instance, when I have eaten and am full because (1) I want to be full for its own sake, and I have achieved that desire, and (2) I am pleased that (1) is the case. 
- This analysis of pleasure supports an argument against psychological hedonism: (1) We take pleasure in F because we want to satisfy our desire for F. (2) We want to satisfy our desire for F because we care about getting F for its own sake. (3) Hence, if we take pleasure in F, we care about F for its own sake. (4) Hence if we take pleasure we care about something other than pleasure for its own sake. This conclusion conflicts with the claim that the only thing we care about for its own sake is pleasure. Butler’s analysis, however, does not seem to fti all desire and pleasure. If I am given a taste of vodka without knowing what it is, and I enjoy it, it does not follow that I wanted to taste vodka for its own sake. On the contrary, if I find out that it is vodka, I may be disgusted by the thought of tasting vodka, and not want to taste it at all for its own sake; but I still may want to taste it because I enjoy the taste. 
- If some, though not all, pleasures presuppose our valuing something other than pleasure, psychological hedonism is false. 
- To identify the sort of pleasure that supports Butler, we may distinguish three cases: 
    * I simply fnid a taste pleasant, no matter what I know about (say) the wine that has the taste; in this case I am pleasantly surprised if I learn that the wine came from New York rather than from a chateau in Burgundy.
    * My pleasure is ‘belief-dependent’, but not ‘value-dependent’. I especially enjoy wine from Chateau Supreme, and if I discover that the wine I have just enjoyed comes from New York rather than Chateau Supreme, I am disappointed, and enjoy it less; the surprise is unpleasant rather than pleasant. But I nonetheless acknowledge that my taste for Chateau Supreme is just a taste; I do not imagine it is non-instrumentally good to have this taste, irrespective of whether I enjoy it. 
    * My pleasure is ‘value-dependent’. I may be especially pleased that you did something for me because I thought it was a spontaneous expression of friendship. In that case I will be much less pleased when I find that your action had some ulterior selfish motive. I show that I value expressions of friendship apart from the pleasure I take in them.²² 
- The mere existence of belief-dependent pleasures does not refute psychological hedonism. Hedonists may claim that belief-dependent pleasures rest on beliefs that ultimately rest on further beliefs about what will give me belief-independent pleasure. But it is more diffciult to answer Butler if we allow value-dependent pleasures; for in this case our explanation of the pleasure presupposes belief in the non-instrumental goodness of something other than pleasure and hence refutes the claim that we regard only pleasure as non-instrumentally good. A hedonist needs to show that apparent beliefs in non-instrumental goodness are really only beliefs in instrumental goodness, so that (in the case just mentioned) we take pleasure in friendship only because we believe it is instrumentally good as a source of pleasure that is not value-dependent. But why should we believe hedonists about this, if we are not hedonists already? 
- Butler’s attack on psychological hedonism fails to refute it outright, but it raises a formidable objection. He shows that some apparent evidence for hedonism is really evidence against hedonism, since some pleasures are value-dependent. Hedonists can explain away this evidence only by offering an implausible analysis of value-dependent pleasures. By showing what a hedonist is committed to, Butler suggests good grounds for rejection of hedonism. 
- Butler believes that his refutation of psychological hedonism also refutes psychological egoism—the view that all my actions are motivated by self-love. This is because he relies on a narrow conception of self-love. In his view, self-love, my concern for my own interest, aims at my own happiness, understood as my own pleasure. This is how he distinguishes one’s ‘general desire of his own happiness’ from one’s particular affections.²³ But his further claims about self-love seem to conflict with the claim that it aims at pleasure. He notices that self-love presupposes a capacity for reflexion and self-awareness. I have to be aware of myself as an agent with a number of desires and with some capacity to regulate my pursuit of their objects. If I reflect suitably on my interest, I form a conception of appropriate action for myself that is based on self-love, not simply on the instinctive or impulsive or unreflective pursuit of the objects of particular desires. Butler also believes that my interest, or good, or welfare, is not some end that I can achieve without achieving the objects of my particular desires and affections. That is why the idea of someone who is well-off and happy, but has completely failed to achieve any of his particular aims and desires, is self-contradictory.²⁴ If self-love wholly ‘engrosses’ us, in such a way that we totally neglect the pursuit of the objects of our particular desires, self-love defeats its own ends.
- Sidgwick cites Butler’s account of self-love to support his claim that the English moralists accept a hedonist conception of happiness.²⁵ Butler’s argument about the difference between pleasureandtheobjectsofparticularpassionssuggeststhathetacitlyacceptstheidentification that Sidgwick attributes to him. But, surprisingly, he does not argue for it.
- It might seem plausible to identify one’s overall good with one’s pleasure, if we accepted a hedonist account of motivation; but Butler rejects any such account. 
- ⁰ He recognizes the first exception by distinguishing self-love as a rational principle from the various ‘instincts and principles of action’ that human beings share with non-rational creatures (P 18). He also recognizes the second exception. For he thinks that after conscience makes its decisions, self-love may reflect on these decisions when we ‘sit down in a cool hour’ (xi 20), to see whether or not they benefit us. Even if self-love always endorses the actions chosen by conscience, this endorsement of self-love is distinct from the deliberation underlying the judgment of conscience.
- One might argue that morality necessarily conflicts with human nature, on these grounds: (1) Morality requires benevolence—the love of one’s neighbour—and benevolence requires concern for others. (2) We act in accord with nature by following self-love. (3) Self-love conflicts with concern for others. (4) Therefore acting in accord with nature conflicts with morality. This is Hobbes’s view of the state of nature; to remove the conflict between morality and one’s nature, one must be in the circumstances in which benefiting others instrumentally benefits oneself.
Hutcheson answers this argument by conceding the first and third premisses and rejecting the second. He argues that, since we have particular passions distinct from self-love, and since these include ‘kind affections’ concerned with the good of others, it is natural to act on these as well as on self-love. Butler objects to this defence of kind affections because it concedes too much to the critic of morality. Hutcheson agrees that morality conflicts with self-love. In order to show that, nonetheless, it is natural to act on morality, he has to identify natural action with action on one’s strongest desire. This conception of the natural relies on the second sense of ‘natural’, which Butler takes to be inadequate for the defence of the naturalist thesis about virtue. Since Hutcheson’s defence rests on strength of desire rather than on authority, it should be rejected.
- Contrary to Hutcheson, Butler believes that a proper grasp of the nature of self-love casts doubt on assumptions that suggest a conflict between self-love and morality. Self-love is a superior principle; it reflects on the particular passions and supervises them. Morality requires benevolence, and benevolence requires concern for others even against my private interest—that is to say, against the passions that are entirely self-centred. But it does not follow that morality conflicts with self-love. For self-love frustrates itself if it does not allow the satisfaction of the particular passions that have objects distinct from the object of self-love. It must also regulate the pursuit of the particular passions, since otherwise they may be bad for me. Self-love does not necessarily conflict with our desire for, say, food, or physical security, or other people’s esteem. Admittedly, each of these desires may on some occasions be taken to excess, if it interferes disastrously with our other aims. But we have no reason to reject such desires altogether.
- An opponent of benevolence might point out that because benevolence is concerned with the interest of another, and not with my own interest, it sometimes conflicts with self-love. But this aspect of benevolence does not by itself show that a self-interested person has any special reason to be suspicious of benevolence; for any particular passion may sometimes conflict with self-love, but a self-interested person who rejected all particular passions would also frustrate self-love.³² In this defence of benevolence, Butler assumes that the object of self-love is the agent’s pleasure, rather than the achievement of the objects of the particular passions. To show the connexion between self-love and benevolence, he appeals to the pleasures resulting from being benevolent (xi 14–15). He argues that, since benevolence is one source of pleasure, self-love has no special reason for rejecting benevolence. 
- He answers some objections to the authority of morality. Many people assume that morality requires benevolence and that benevolence is bound to conflict with self-love.
Butler believes that this assumption rests on the errors that he corrects in his account of self-love and the particular passions. Once we see these errors, we see that self-love and benevolence need not conflict, and so we can reject the claims about morality that imply the conflict.
This argument vindicates morality, however, only if (1) morality requires only what the passion of benevolence moves us to do, and (2) the outlook of self-love determines what is natural, because self-love is not only a superior principle, but the supreme principle. Butler accepts neither assumption. 
- Butler agrees with Balguy’s criticism of Hutcheson’s account of benevolence. In contrast to Hutcheson, he speaks of benevolence in two distinct ways. On the one hand, benevolence as a passion is one of the particular affections, involving a desire for the good of another for the other’s sake. On the other hand, it is a principle that to some extent is analogous to self-love.² It is not simply a collection of benevolent impulses, but something more like a rational principle, directed towards the good of society. A rational principle is the only plausible basis of the claim that benevolence is the sum of virtue.³ 
- Still, though Butler distinguishes the passion from the principle of benevolence, he does not take the principle to be independent of the passion. On the contrary, he takes the reality of the passion to vindicate the principle. In his introduction of benevolence he suggests that any extent of the passion ‘points out what we were designed for, as really as though it were in a higher degree and more extensive’ (i 6). We might doubt this claim. Why does the fact that people naturally tend to care about the interests of their parents, or children, or particular friends, or about particular people’s sufferings, prove that a rational concern for the good of others in general is natural (in Butler’s third sense) to human beings? Butler’s claim seems even less plausible if the rational principle of benevolence may sometimes conflict with the passion of benevolence. If I think about the good of others in general, I may have to restrain my desire to benefit this particular person at the expense of another for whom I have no passion of benevolence (for instance, my child at the expense of a stranger’s child).
- To show that benevolence as a principle completes benevolence as a passion, Butler needs to show that the passion is directed not only to people with whom we have some prior relation, such as parents, children, and friends, but also to the good of particular individuals whose sufferings we become aware of. The Good Samaritan helped a particular individual with whom he had no previous connexion. If benevolence extends this far, then Butler might argue it is also reasonably extended to people we have not met; for if we happen to see or meet A and do not happen to see or meet B, but we know that A and B are in equal need, we have reason to extend our benevolence equally to each of them.
The extension of benevolence might be compared to the rational extension of a particular passion. I might initially be fond of eating the wrong food, but once I realize that tofu is both tasty and nutritious, I may come to enjoy eating it, and form an appetite for it that I did not have before. This modification of a particular passion seems to require the intervention of rational self-love, connecting my particular passion with the concerns of the whole self, and modifying them in the light of these concerns. This appeal to nature and to the needs of the whole self explains the modification of a passion by a rational principle.
Some parallel intervention by a rational principle seems to be needed to explain how the passion of benevolence grows into the principle of benevolence.
What rational principle could intervene? It cannot be the principle of benevolence whose origin we are trying to understand. To claim that the relevant principle is self-love is to insist on a closer connexion between self-love and benevolence than Butler characteristically recognizes. The only relevant superior principle seems to be conscience, which we have not yet examined. 
- To grasp Butler’s views on conscience and morality, we need to survey his different uses of ‘conscience’ at different points in the Sermons. In the Preface and the earlier sermons, he tends to mention ‘reflexion’ or ‘conscience’ or both together in a generic sense, referring to the superior principle. An irrational passion is said to conflict with ‘reflexion and conscience’ (P 14, ii 3). Conscience is ‘the principle in man by which he approves or disapproves his heart, temper, and actions’ (i 8; cf. P 9 on approbation). This reflexive attitude, assessing different passions by considering weight of reasons rather than strength of desire, matches Butler’s characterization of a superior principle in general. Similarly, he speaks of the ‘superior principle of reflexion or conscience’, which has natural authority as distinct from strength (ii 8). He begins Sermon iii by claiming to have established the supremacy of ‘the one superior principle of reflexion or conscience’ In these passages Butler identifies guidance by conscience with guidance by a superior principle. He attaches a very broad sense to ‘conscience’, so that to act on one’s conscience is simply to act on a superior principle. ‘Reflexion’ (P 24, 25) or ‘reflex approbation’ (P 26) is his generic term for a superior principle. Sometimes he identifies it with conscience without suggesting that there is any other superior principle. But whenhestateshispositioninmoredetail,herecognizesself-loveasasuperiorprinciple distinct from conscience.⁸ When he identifies conscience with the supreme principle, he recognizes distinct and independent superior principles. If he did not recognize them, his claim that conscience is supreme would be trivial; for there would be no other superior principle that could rival it.
- To explain how acting on ‘reflexion or conscience’ is natural, Butler does not consider moral judgments directly. Instead he considers a rash action that someone undertakes against the principle of reasonable self-love. He takes it to be clear that in acting against self-love one violates one’s nature, and so he infers that reasonable self-love is a superior principle.⁹ He attributes to self-love the sort of authority he has previously attributed to ‘reflexion or conscience’.
- Butler claims that we can recognize the superiority of self-love ‘without particular consideration of conscience’ (ii 11). In this claim he uses ‘conscience’ in a narrower sense than he had in mind in speaking of ‘reflexion or conscience’. The argument about self-love was intended to prove the supremacy of the ‘faculty which surveys, approves, or disapproves’ (ii 9), which is ‘reflexion or conscience’. But we cannot prove the superiority of self-love without particular consideration of the faculty that surveys and approves; for self-love is shown to be precisely an expression of that faculty. Reasonable self-love is not distinct from conscience, if conscience is understood as reflex approbation in general; on that understanding of conscience, reasonable self-love is simply a manifestation of conscience.
Hence the conscience that is not considered must be conscience in a more specific sense.
When Butler explicitly sets aside ‘particular consideration of conscience’, he signals the fact that he intends to treat conscience as one among a number of superior principles.¹⁰ This shift from a generic conception of conscience (as the principle of reflexion underlying any superior principle) to a specific conception (of a superior principle distinct from reasonable self-love), and back to a generic conception, does not destroy Butler’s argument, unless he takes his argument for the supremacy of generic conscience to prove the supremacy of specific conscience (the principle that takes the moral point of view, in contrast to the view of reasonable self-love). He has not yet argued for the superiority of specific conscience.
- In Sermon iii Butler clarifies the distinct place of specific conscience as a superior principle.
He begins with generic conscience, by claiming to have established ‘the natural supremacy of reflexion or conscience’ (iii 1), and takes this to imply that ‘mankind hath the rule of right within himself’ (iii 5). This rule of right is the generic principle that relies on authority (iii 2).
Butler now asks about our obligation to attend and to follow this rule of right. His first answer is that it is the law of our nature; as he has shown in the argument about self-love, superior principles both express our nature (as rational agents) and take account of our nature (by exercising foresight for the needs of a human being as a system).¹² But he now considers an objector who asks why we should follow the law of our nature if it requires us to act against our interest.¹³ He therefore considers the possibility of a superior principle that conflicts with self-love. 
- We might understand Butler to claim that the supreme principle is self-love, and that we decide whether an action is natural for us by deciding whether it is in our interest.
But this is not his position. At the summary at the end of this sermon, he maintains that natural action must accord with a superior principle. He acknowledges both reasonable self-love and conscience as superior principles (iii 9).¹⁴ He does not argue that the superiority of any superior principle implies the supremacy of conscience; for both reasonable self-love and conscience are superior principles, and conflict with either of them makes an action unnatural. Since they are both superior, and both sources of natural action, any action recommended by conscience and rejected by reasonable self-love would be, to that extent, unnatural. Butler allows the logical possibility of a conflict between self-love and conscience, and deals with it by arguing that it is not a practical possibility that needs to concern us. 
- Though the generic description of conscience in terms that seem to apply equally to self-love makes Butler’s exposition obscure, it does not necessarily betray confusion.
For though he recognizes that distinct superior principles belong to generic reflexion or conscience, he does not believe that specific conscience is simply one superior principle among others. On the contrary, specific conscience fully realizes the superiority that is present to some degree in all superior principles. Once we recognize the obligation to follow reflexion and generic conscience, we must also recognize the obligation to follow the principle that most fully realizes the superiority of generic conscience, and hence we must recognize the obligation to follow specific conscience.
This claim about more and less complete realizations of superiority needs some clarifica-tion. The degree of superiority of a principle may be assessed by the extent to which it relies on reasons rather than strength of desires, and by the number of relevant considerations it takes into account. Measured by these standards, conscience is the supreme principle of reflexion because it satisfies the generic conception of a superior principle to a higher degree than any other does. 
- If he were convinced that morality is utilitarian, but that conscience is the source of the judgments about fairness that conflict with utilitarianism, he would have to recognize a disagreement between conscience and morality. But he does not seem to contemplate this possibility. He relies on conscientious judgments as a means of access to our moral judgments, and assumes that our moral theory must conform to these judgments. 
- Butler claims that specific conscience necessarily prescribes the principles of morality, not simply those of reasonable self-love. Hence his claim that it is natural and reasonable to live according to specific conscience implies that living in accord with one’s rational nature as a whole requires living in accord with moral reason. Butler conceives specific conscience as essentially reasonable, but he does not assume it is to be identified with the whole of practical reason; it is moral reason. 
- Butler’s main questions, therefore, are these: (1) Does generic conscience (i.e., the general principle of reflexion) include specific conscience (i.e., the principle that approves of morality)? (2) Is it natural (i.e., in accord with the requirements of the whole nature of an individual) to act in accord with specific conscience? (3) Is specific conscience also supreme (and hence superior to self-love)? If Butler’s claims about morality and nature are correct, a correct account of morality shouldshowhowmoralityisinaccordwithnature,understoodasinvolvingtherequirements of the whole system of human desires and capacities. We have already seen how Butler argues that prudence is natural. To see how he thinks morality is natural, we must see, first of all, how he understands the content of morality. His answer to this question may support his claim that morality is natural. 
- Butler’s assumption that St Paul advocates promotion of the public good shows how far he is influenced by utilitarianism. For he might well have argued that St Paul refers to concern for particular people and their interests and rights, and that such concern is an aspect of our moral sense that underlies our concern for justice and excludes purely utilitarian policies. He could have used a legitimate Scriptural argument to support his own efforts to display the non-utilitarian elements in morality. The utilitarian assumes that benevolent concern for individuals supports a utilitarian maximizing policy. Butler does not challenge that assumption. He shows how deeply the utilitarian assumption is entrenched, even in a moralist who might be expected to question it. 
- Butler qualifies and restricts St Paul’s claim by mentioning the various ways in which rational benevolence resists or restrains the operations of the passion of benevolence, and even the operations of a direct concern with the public good. He mentions the importance of friendships that involve discrimination between people, uncertainty of judgments about the public good, the importance of laws and so on (xii 27). In these ways benevolence has to proceed indirectly, if it is not to frustrate its own end. The need for indirectness recalls Butler’s arguments about self-love and the particular passions. 
- We might, then, take Berkeley’s indirect utilitarianism to lie behind Butler’s remarks about restrictions on benevolence. Berkeley explains why the utility of accepting the utilitarian principle alone will be lower than the utility of accepting subordinate principles that we refuse to break even for reasons of utility. If this is what Butler has in mind, his restrictions on benevolence might be taken to clarify, rather than refute, the claim that benevolence is the whole of morality. 
- WhatsortofabstractionhasButlerinmind?Ifhemeantsimplythatwedonotthinkdirectly about the public good when we decide to follow these moral principles, his abstraction is consistent with utilitarianism. For Berkeley’s reasons, we might argue that utilitarianism requires abstraction from considerations of utility in decisions about particular cases. But this does not seem to be the sort of abstraction that Butler intends; for he has already recognized that the utilitarian position leaves room for some indirectness, and he takes these cases (fidelity and so on) to introduce a new question. He seems to mean that in these cases the relevant rules have no indirect utilitarian justification, and we do not accept the rules because we believe they have some non-apparent indirect utilitarian justification. Hence the characteristicmotivesofvirtuearedifferentfrombenevolence;evenifwebelievethatindirect utilitarianism supports a given virtue, that belief does not explain our belief that it is a virtue. 
- Butler, however, does not affirm that God’s only end is the general good and his moral character ‘merely that of benevolence’—he concedes this only for the sake of argument.³² He agrees that if the premiss about God’s benevolence is true, God has given us moral rules that have a utilitarian defence. But this defence is nothing to us as moral agents. Our reason for disapproving of injustice does not depend on its effects on general happiness; the production of happiness is a coincidence that may matter to God but does not give us our primary moral reason.³³ 
- To see why he might have a good reason, we may consider a parallel explanation of physics. Suppose that God recognizes that it will maximize utility if we understand the causal processes and laws of the physical world, and we act on that knowledge. Even so, it does not follow that the properties we grasp when we understand physics are the properties that maximize utility. Or suppose that the Nobel Foundation infallibly rewards the scientists who find the true theories with Nobel Prizes; it still does not follow that winning the Nobel Prize makes someone’s theory true, even if it is an absolutely reliable symptom of truth. Butler believes that an appeal to God’s utilitarian outlook to support a utilitarian moral theory would make a similar mistake. We ought not to argue directly from facts about the causal origin of our moral judgments to conclusions about the character of right-making properties.
To explain why utility, in Butler’s view, is not the right-making property, we might argue 
- An indirect utilitarian might answer Butler on two points: (1) Though admittedly we do not always take utility to be all that matters, we are mistaken. (2) The analogy with physics does not work; for Butler agrees that in morality utility sometimes matters, and even that it is sometimes decisive, whereas utility never matters in physics (we may suppose).
The first answer does not refute Butler. Utilitarians cannot afford to reject our judgments of relevance, but must take them to be correct sometimes. If they could not rely on such judgments, they would undermine their grounds for thinking that utility matters. Berkeley assumes that indirect utilitarianism allows us to explain the appearance of our accepting non-utilitarian rules. But if utilitarians admit that we have non-utilitarian as well as utilitarian judgments about moral relevance, they need to show that our non-utilitarian judgments are somehow less reliable than our utilitarian judgments. Butler argues that we have no reason to prefer our utilitarian judgments. Sidgwick argues that common sense is ‘unconsciously utilitarian’, but Butler disagrees; even if we know about the balance of utility, we do not take that to decide all the questions that arise. 
- An indirect utilitarian might answer Butler on two points: (1) Though admittedly we do not always take utility to be all that matters, we are mistaken. (2) The analogy with physics does not work; for Butler agrees that in morality utility sometimes matters, and even that it is sometimes decisive, whereas utility never matters in physics (we may suppose).
The first answer does not refute Butler. Utilitarians cannot afford to reject our judgments of relevance, but must take them to be correct sometimes. If they could not rely on such judgments, they would undermine their grounds for thinking that utility matters. Berkeley assumes that indirect utilitarianism allows us to explain the appearance of our accepting non-utilitarian rules. But if utilitarians admit that we have non-utilitarian as well as utilitarian judgments about moral relevance, they need to show that our non-utilitarian judgments are somehow less reliable than our utilitarian judgments. Butler argues that we have no reason to prefer our utilitarian judgments. Sidgwick argues that common sense is ‘unconsciously utilitarian’, but Butler disagrees; even if we know about the balance of utility, we do not take that to decide all the questions that arise. The second answer fails for similar reasons. If we attach some weight to the judgments that favour utilitarianism, we need some reason for discounting the judgments that favour non-utilitarian considerations. A utilitarian would be unwise to discount them simply because they are non-utilitarian; for such discounting would affect utilitarian judgments as well, unless we take the truth of utilitarianism to be settled without reference to common sense.
If utilitarians argue from common-sense judgments, they are open to Butler’s objections. If they do not argue from common sense, they need to show that their preferred method is preferable to argument from common sense.
- Butler’s arguments about divine goodness and moral rightness take a position in the debate that Cumberland and Hutcheson begin. Both of them identify God’s goodness with benevolence. Maxwell disputes Cumberland’s view. Balguy and Grove agree with Maxwell;
they reject the arguments of Hutcheson and Bayes to show that God’s moral character is simply benevolent.³⁴ Butler agrees with Balguy and Grove. Against Hutcheson he argues that the moral sense includes non-utilitarian elements. Hence we have one good reason to believe that God’s moral goodness includes non-utilitarian elements of goodness. This reason might be outweighed if we had strong theological grounds for believing that God is benevolent and has no moral characteristics distinct from benevolence. But theological and Scriptural arguments suggest that God is just and merciful towards individuals, not simply benevolent towards the whole human race.³⁵ 
- In opposition to Hutcheson, Butler distinguishes a rational judgment from favourable feeling. We might feel distressed or upset that someone caused us harm, but we would not make an unfavourable moral judgment unless we thought he had violated some principles that we think he could reasonably be expected to accept. If we decide to drive the wrong way on a one-way street just to save a few minutes, we may be distressed at colliding with a truck coming round a corner, but we can hardly blame the truck driver for anything. We blame people only by appeal to principles that we think we can reasonably expect them to accept.⁴⁰ This observation that moral judgment expresses a superior principle, not simply a feeling of approval, does not refute utilitarianism. But it raises a pertinent question for the utilitarian:
how do the rational standards on which the superior principle of conscience relies favour utilitarianism? Cumberland assumes that the rational point of view attends only to the good consequences of actions. Butler looks more closely at the standards defining the outlook of conscience, and finds that they do not support consequentialism, and hence do not support utilitarianism. He therefore agrees with Maxwell’s criticism of Cumberland.⁴ 
- Since our moral judgments appeal to desert, merit, and appropriateness, rather than to the strength of our reactions, they presuppose responsibility. Since these judgments about blameworthiness are different from utilitarian judgments about what maximizes the good, the utilitarian judgments do not capture our moral judgments. 
- Butler does not draw attention to any common feature of these different exceptions to the utilitarian principle. Hence, he might be taken to hold the pluralist intuitionist view defended by Price and Reid.⁴⁴ This view recognizes a number of ultimate principles none of which is supreme, and none of which provides any systematic reasoned basis for deciding conflicts among principles.
But Butler may not intend a pluralist position. Though he does not insist on any common feature of the exceptions to utility, he suggests one. For each case involves reciprocity and equality. If we were asked to explain the principles we rely on in the judgments that Butler mentions, we might say that these are fair principles for evaluating both ourselves and others. We would rightly resent being treated badly simply because we had harmed other people, if the harm was either justified or unavoidable. We do not merely apply these judgments to other people; we also expect to have them applied to ourselves, and we apply them to ourselves in considering whether we deserve blame. 
- Restraint on self-sacrifice is one aspect of fairness that is fundamental in morality, but not fundamental in utilitarianism. Another aspect of fairness, however, goes beyond restraint of self-sacrifice. Butler’s remarks on punishment imply that some moral attitudes are retrospective, rather than purely prospective; they consider what individuals have done in comparison with what they could reasonably have been expected to do. Principles that restrained self-sacrifice, but lacked the appropriate retrospective elements, would not be morally acceptable, because fairness to individuals requires retrospective treatment.
These claims about the content of morality matter for two of Butler’s further claims:
(1) Morality is to be identified with living in accord with nature. (2) Conscience approves of morality. If morality were identical to the requirements of utilitarian benevolence, he would have to prove these two further claims by connecting nature and conscience with utilitarianism. But since he does not accept utilitarianism, he has to connect nature and conscience with moral principles including the non-utilitarian elements we have mentioned.
Does he make his task easier or harder by rejecting utilitarianism? 
- To understand some of Butler’s claims about nature, morality, and superiority, we should return to his rather complex views on self-love and benevolence. Self-love is superior to the passion of benevolence; for benevolence towards particular persons ‘may be a degree of weakness, and so be blameable’ (P 39). When the passion of benevolence conflicts with self-love, self-love has authority and ought to prevail.
- Reasonable self-love and conscience are the chief or superior principles in the nature of man, because an action may be suitable to this nature, though all other principles be violated; but becomes unsuitable, if either of these are.’ (iii 9) It is not clear what possibility Butler envisages in the ‘because’ clause. He might have either of these two in mind:
(1) An action is natural if and only if either self-love or conscience endorses it. (2) An action is natural if and only if both endorse it. In the ‘but becomes . . .’ clause he accepts a further claim: (3) If either self-love or conscience opposes an action, the action is unnatural. If he believes both (1) and (3), an action that is endorsed by one superior principle and opposed by the other is both natural and unnatural. Butler excludes this possibility if he accepts two other claims:
(4) Conscience approves only virtuous action. (5) Actions are virtuous if and only if they are natural, and vicious if and only if they are unnatural. Butler clearly accepts (4). But does he accept (5)? He has a reasonable alternative: (6) Actions are virtuous to the extent that they are natural and vicious to the extent that they are unnatural. According to (6), naturalness and unnaturalness allow degrees, so that an action that is contrary to nature (to some degree) may still be, all things considered, natural; for it may violate one superior rational principle but be endorsed by another. The context favours (6), by allowing degrees of naturalness. 
- Sometimes Butler seems to imply that self-love should always prevail, because it is superior to benevolence.⁴⁵ As we have seen earlier, he recognizes self-love and conscience as the two superior principles, and he does not mention benevolence as a third. Moreover, he claims that an action is unsuitable to our nature if it violates either of the two superior principles.⁴⁶ If, then, self-love rejected an action, and benevolence were the only principle supporting it, we would be acting unnaturally if we performed it.
Butler implies, therefore, that self-love is superior to the principle of benevolence. If these were the only two rational principles in our nature, it would be appropriate to regulate the demands of benevolence by appeal to self-love. As Butler argues, this does not mean that we would not be benevolent, but only that we would avoid the blameworthy degree of benevolence that requires unreasonable self-sacrifice. Self-love, then, is superior to the principle of benevolence, in its own right.
It does not follow, however, that we ought never to sacrifice our interest to do what benevolence requires. For on some occasions conscience may favour the benevolent action over the prudent action, and on such occasions we ought to follow conscience. If we follow it against self-love, we act unnaturally to some degree, insofar as we violate the superior principle of self-love. But we nonetheless act naturally on the whole, because conscience considers what is and is not suitable to my nature as a whole, whereas self-love considers only a part of my nature. 
- In appealing to this graded conception of nature, Butler sums up his argument in Sermon iii. He begins the sermon with the suggestion that things may be to some extent contrary to nature, but in accordance with nature all things considered.⁴⁷ Butler’s conception of nature allows some things to be contrary to important aspects of our nature, but less contrary to our nature as a whole than their opposites would be. Similarly, he speaks of the nature of man ‘as respecting’ himself only and as respecting society (i 4). These two aspects of nature mark two ways in which something could be natural or unnatural.⁴⁸ If, then, we are sometimes justified in following benevolence against self-love, this is not because benevolence prescribes it, but because conscience requires us to follow benevolence.
Hence we are really following conscience, not benevolence. We choose the most natural action by following conscience, which approves the actions that suit our nature as a whole 
- To see why Butler thinks the actions approved by conscience are natural, we must attend to the content of morality. If utilitarianism were correct, then, in Butler’s view, we ought to identify morality with benevolence and concern for the public good. We would thereby identify morality with a self-sacrificing outlook that treats an individual person as a means to maximizing the total good. Since conscience takes the moral point of view, it would coincide with the rational principle of benevolence, if utilitarianism were correct. Even though the concept of conscience would be different from the concept of rational benevolence, their advice would necessarily coincide.
If Butler accepted this view of morality, his claims about conscience and nature would imply that my nature as a whole requires this maximizing attitude. But he neither affirms nor defends this conclusion. He takes benevolence to be a natural passion, and supposes that it is natural to satisfy it to some degree; but these claims do not support utilitarian benevolence. Since he eventually rejects utilitarianism, he takes the outlook of conscience to be non-utilitarian; hence he takes natural action to be guided by non-utilitarian principles. 
- Butler believes that it is blameworthy to be too little concerned for one’s own good and too ready to sacrifice it for the good of others. 










# Difficulties

- Rational deliberation may be either:
    - Eliminative:rational deliberation is impossible: there is nothing except experience of a siquence of inclinations and aversions. It does not explain the choices and actions it seeks to explain.
    - Greek Sceptic: rational deliberation is possible, but people are mistaken, because they lack the basis that they think it has - If Hobbes took this line, suggesting that we will abandon deliberation when we see it is baseless, he would undermine his argument to show that will is simply the last appetite in H-deliberation. If deliberation is not simply H-deliberation, will is not simply the last appetite.
- It does not follow, however, that self-love aims at my own pleasure, as opposed to external objects. In speaking of the ‘enjoyment of those objects . . . ’ Butler might simply be using ‘enjoyment’ in the sense of ‘achieving or satisfying a desire’. But even if he takes it to imply pleasure, he shows only that the enjoyment of achieving my goal is part of my ultimate end, not that my end is nothing more than enjoyment. If self-love seeks my good and my interest, it values both the achievement of my desires and the value-dependent pleasure that I take in that achievement. Hence Butler should not say that self-love values pleasure alone. On the contrary, since (as he agrees) the pleasure it values is value-dependent, it cannot value pleasure alone.
Butler, therefore, does not justify his claim that self-love values nothing external for the sake of the thing itself, but values an external thing only as a means to pleasure. If value-dependent pleasure in (say) having friends rests on our valuing friendship for its own sake, self-love values the objects of desire for their own sakes. In claiming that self-love aims only at pleasure for its own sake, Butler underestimates his case against psychological hedonism. A fuller statement of his case would perhaps have made clear to him what he ought to say about self-love.
Butler’s conception of a superior principle suggests a further objection to the conception of self-love that appears in his remarks on psychological hedonism and egoism. If self-love concentrates on pleasure, it resembles particular passions. To be superior to them, it has to consider the proper proportion between the satisfaction of one desire and of another. It cannot do this if it considers only pleasure; for, as he agrees, pleasure is not the only thing I have reason to value. 
- He might be rejecting either or both of two claims: 
    -  (1) The sole and sufficient motive for all my actions is self-love. Butler’s point about being ‘engrossed’ by self-love casts doubt on the first egoist thesis. If we thought that self-love could replace every other desire, Butler would be right to say that domination by self-love, so conceived, is self-defeating. Moreover, if we thought that nothing except the object of self-love is to be valued for its own sake, we would still defeat our aims; for self-love values the achievement of objects that we value for their own sake apart from self-love.
    -  (2) Self-love is a necessary motive for all my actions. He does not properly distinguish these two claims; and though he has arguments against them both, he does not seem to see that they need different answers. But these objections to engrossing self-love do not refute the second egoist thesis. For, according to this thesis, self-love alone need not be the motive of every action. We may value revenge, say, or friendship for its own sake, and our desire for it may be a motive for some of our actions. The egoist adds that we would not pursue this object of this desire on this occasion if we did not also believe that it would promote our overall good. Since we regard our good as the right combination of the ends of particular affections, we do not cease to value this object for its own sake if we also believe that its pursuit promotes our good. Butler’s refutation of hedonism does not touch this egoist thesis. He needs to argue that concern for our own interest does not regulate all our desires. Two different arguments are worth trying:
        - We may reject self-interest for something inferior. We have irrational desires, which we pursue despite knowing that it is bad for us. We pursue a grievance against someone, for instance, even though we know that the grievance is unjustified and that we will only harm ourselves. 
        - We may reject self-interest for something superior. We act on moral motives, if we believe that this is rational action (and hence not included in the first exception to psychological egoism) that is independent of self-love. Scotus argues for both sorts of exception to the psychological egoist assumption, and Butler agrees with him.³⁰
- To the extent that he regards self-love as a desire for pleasure, he tends to confuse the issue about egoism with the issue about hedonism. 
- In some places Butler seems to take this objection to be relevant; for he defends himself by arguing that benevolence offers the degree and type of pleasure that might suit someone seeking to maximize pleasure (xi 15). But this is not the best reply that he can offer. A better reply would rely on two other aspects of self-love: (1) The pleasure that we gain from achieving the aim of self-love is value-dependent pleasure. Hence self-love values the objects of our desire for their own sakes, not merely as a means to pleasure. (2) Self-love is a superior principle, aiming at the achievement of our desires in their proper proportion. If benevolent desires are among those that, in their proper proportion, suit our nature, reasonable and enlightened self-love endorses them.
- Butler’s conception of self-love is difficult to understand. For though he believes it aims at our good, he also suggests that self-love may so ‘engross’ us that we fail to achieve our good.³³ But if self-love is concerned with my good and my interest, which are fixed by our nature, enlightened self-love will secure my good; for it will secure, as far as it can, the satisfaction of our particular passions in the proportion that is required by our good. 