- Virtue Rationalism (virtue = to be guided by practical reason) is true
- Extreme Will-Intellect-Passion Rationalism (thought without desire motivates) is true
- Clarke’s extreme intellectualism fits his foundationalist and intuitionist epistemology.
- Clarke’s belief in ‘eternal relations of fitness’. If such a view were right, then we could infer simply from the fact that A had benefited B that B ought to benefit A in return, without reference to the fact that A and B are rational agents in specific circumstances that affect their rational agency 
- Intuitionism is true: we can grasp principles of benevolence independently of grasping principles of justice. And they may conflict. Then, to resolve the conflict, we need third grasping of principles 
- According to rationalist critics, Hobbes is more deeply mistaken. Cudworth and Clarke attack all attempts to vindicate morality by reducing normative facts (i.e., facts about what we ought to do, and what we have reason to do) to non-normative psychological facts (about what we are in fact moved to do).
- he maintains a connexion between reason and morality
- oppose theological voluntarism. 
- In Clarke the belief in intrinsic morality is separated from naturalism,
- Clarke accepts Cudworth's going beyond Suarez: According to Suarez’s ‘intermediate’ position (as Suarez describes it), some aspects of natural law are independent of the divine legislative will and some depend on it. Natural law is law, and imposes an obligation, insofar as it depends on the divine will, whereas the rightness and wrongness of the acts that it prescribes and prohibits are features of the nature of things in themselves, apart from the divine will. Emphasis on one side or another of Suarez’s position results in a more strongly voluntarist or naturalist account. It is clearer that Cudworth goes beyond Suarez on this point, and reverts to Vasquez’s view that obligation, as well as duty, belongs to nature and not primarily to will.
- Sometimes, however, Leibniz’s principle of perfection seems rather similar to one of Clarke’s principles of fitness—as though it were intended as a principle that we can just see to be correct, without reference to our nature as rational agents. 
- Shaftesbury sketches a defence that is developed more fully, and with more specifci reference to orthodox Christianity, by Clarke and Balguy.⁵¹ 
- He addresses those who reject the Christian revelation because it cannot be vindicated by reason. In his view, the basic principles of morality are evident to reason, apart from any appeal to revelation, and these moral principles make it reasonable to believe in the Christianrevelation.Hissuccessdependsonrevealingtherationalgroundsof ‘theunalterable obligations of natural religion’, which we discover through our moral judgments. To reveal these grounds he defends some elements of a naturalist position against the view of those who claim ‘that there is no such real difference [sc. between good and evil] originally, necessarily, and absolutely in the nature of things’
- This description of Clarke’s argument suggests correctly that he supports Cudworth’s doctrine of eternal and immutable morality. He defends Cudworth’s position against the Hobbesian reduction of morality to counsels of narrow prudence and to positive law, and against the voluntarist explanation of morality as an expression of God’s legislative will. 
- Clarke departs from Cumberland, in rejecting both (1) a legislative conception of obligation, and (2) the identification of benevolence with morality.
- Clarke, however, does not defend all the aspects of Scholastic naturalism that Cudworth accepts. He goes beyond Cudworth in a rationalist direction. In his view, moral properties can be grasped by reason without any reference to human nature or human ends. In claiming that they are grasped by reason, he reaffrims the traditional naturalist view. But in claiming that a true description of the relevant facts need not refer to nature, he affirms rationalism without naturalism. His position lacks the teleological elements of Cudworth’s view and of Cudworth’s Scholastic and Stoic sources. Does Clarke’s non-naturalist rationalism present the best part of Cudworth freed from unhelpful accretions? Or does it leave out an important part of Cudworth’s view and thereby reach a less plausible view? 
- Clarke affirms that laws of nature are obligatory without reference to any divine command. He refers to Socrates’ argument against Euthyphro, and uses it against a voluntarist account of natural law. Following Cicero, he insists that natural law describes what is praiseworthy whether or not it is actually praised. Since actual praise does not determine the content of natural law, actual will cannot determine it either; hence it is not up to a human or a divine legislator to change what is right or wrong.⁹ 
- He does not even mention Cumberland’s view that without an imperative law mere amiability constitutes neither moral goodness nor obligation. He implicitly rejects Cumberland’s view that obligation lies in the act of the person imposing the obligation.
- He agrees with Cudworth, and with Maxwell’s criticism of Cumberland, in taking obligation to lie in facts about right and wrong apart from any act of obliging or any motive created in the person obliged.¹⁵ This is the extreme naturalist view of obligation, as Suarez understands it.
- This is the extreme naturalist view of obligation, as Suarez understands it. Vasquez accepts thisviewinclaimingthatthenaturallaw,understoodsimplyasobjectiverightnessandwrongness, implies obligation.¹⁶ Clarke follows Vasquez, in opposition to the voluntarist view of Culverwell, Locke, Cumberland, and Pufendorf, that both morality and obligation require imperative law. He does not explain why he prefers the extreme naturalist view to the moderate naturalist view of Suarez (and perhaps Grotius). Suarez argues that obligation depends on imperative law, but moral facts, properties, and duties (debita) depend only on natural facts. 
- Clarke agrees with Cudworth in treating ‘obligation’ as interchangeable with ‘duty’. In affirming a naturalist, as opposed to a voluntarist, position about morality and the divine will, he speaks indifferently of duty and obligation.¹⁷ Apart from all divine or human legislation, there is a difference between good and evil, and some things are more fti and appropriate than others. These naturally fit and good things include an obligation. To show that things have an obligatory power, nothing more needs to be shown, in Clarke’s view, than that they are good and reasonable and fit to be done in themselves.¹⁸ But if Clarke’s position is over-simplified, that does not seem to affect his main point. Despite his favourable references to Cumberland, he does not agree with Cumberland’s view that imposed obligation is necessary for morality. In affirming that obligation follows from facts about nature rather than will, he neither accepts nor rejects the substance of Suarez’s view of obligation, but he accepts the substance of the naturalist view of morality. 
- Clarke agrees with Cudworth in believing that the law of nature and the moral properties it involves are eternal and immutable. He takes these properties to be eternal and necessary fitnesses in things that result from their eternal and necessary relations.¹⁹ These eternal ftinesses are the grounds of obligations on us apart from any positive will or command of God. 
- Clarke offers a list of moral principles that embody fitnesses: 
    - Since God is infinitely superior to us, it is fit for us to honour, worship, obey, and imitate God. 
    - It is fit for God to govern the universe ‘according to constant and regular ends’ and to do what is best for the whole creation, rather than to design the misery of the whole. 
    - Similarly, in relations among human beings, benevolence is more fit than universal destructiveness;²⁰ 
    - it is more fit to treat one another justly than to consider only one’s own advantage; 
    - and more fit to preserve the life of an innocent person than to kill him or to let him die without any reason or provocation
- Clarke combines this claim about the source of eternal ftinesses with a claim about our knowledge of these ftinesses; he believes that they are perfectly evident to an unprejudiced subject. In speaking of what is clear ‘in the nature of the thing itself’, Clarke seems to mean that simple inspection of the relevant proposition convinces us of its truth. Someone who denies that there is light while he is looking at the sun fails to recognize something that is as obvious as anything could be.²¹ If someone entertains doubt on this point, it is pointless to argue with him, or to try to convince him on any question that depends on the evidence of the senses, just as there is no point in arguing about geometry with someone who rejects its basic assumptions.²² 
- It is not clear why judgments about what is fit in itself should have this degree of evidence. Perhaps Clarke is combining two conceptions of fitness ‘in itself’. (1) In saying that things are fit in themselves or in their own nature, he is opposing the view that their rightness depends on divine or human legislation or on their promotion of some further end—maximum utility, for instance. (2) But he also seems to mean that their rightness belongs to them entirely without reference to anything else; it resides simply in the character of an action, taken by itself. This second conception of ftiness may be interpreted so as to support Clarke’s epistemological claim. For if we grasp ‘the character of an action, taken by itself’ simply by grasping the concept of the action, anything that ‘flows from the essence’ follows necessarily from the concept. Hence, anyone who clearly grasps the concept of the relevant action thereby grasps what folws from its nature. 
- Clarke’s idea of intrinsic morality may be defended by appeal to Cudworth’s demand for eternal and immutable morality. If the rightness of sparing the life of an innocent person is immutable, it belongs to the action simply insofar as it is sparing the life of an innocent person. If it depended on some further facts about the agent or the beneficiary of the action, it could change from being right to wrong if these further facts changed; hence its rightness would not be immutable. If it is to be immutably right, the mere fact that it is sparing the life of an innocent person must be the sole and sufficient basis of its rightness. Though Cudworth does not connect immutability with the intrinsic character of an action in exactly Clarke’s terms, Clarke might intelligibly claim to capture Cudworth’s implicit position. 
- Clarke, therefore, agrees with Suarez and Cudworth insofar as he relies on claims about intrinsic morality, fitness to nature, and immutability, and explains these claims in opposition to a legislative conception of morality. He departs from them, however, in supposing that intrinsic and immutable morality is intrinsic to actions themselves, without reference to their relation to agents of a certain kind. 
- Teleology is present in Suarez’s naturalism no less than in Aquinas’ naturalism; hence, Suarez’s claims about morality as fitness to rational nature include a teleological element that is absent from Clarke’s claims about eternal fitnesses. Clarke offers no account of rational nature that might make it reasonable to claim that one or another action is fitting to rational nature.  Clarke, therefore, abandons Suarez’s naturalism.²⁴
- Fitness and contradiction, therefore, according to Suarez, are three-term relations, involving an action, an essence, and human nature. Being innocent and being deliberately killed are incompatible, because they do not fit the requirements of human nature, and in particular do not fit the social aspects of human nature, which require us to refrain from harming others (except in circumstances specifeid by the requirements of human nature). According to Clarke, the relevant relations have only two terms; they involve the action and the essence that it contradicts. Since a triangle essentially has angles adding up to 180 degrees, a triangle with angles adding up to 200 degrees contradicts this essence. Since an innocent person is one who has a right not to be killed, the rightness of deliberate killing of the innocent contradicts the essence of innocence. 
- Passmore says (corectly) that in Clarke, what is eternal and immutable is a system of duties, not the goodness of a certain way of life.
- The disappearance of the teleological element, and hence of the appeal to goodness that Passmore mentions, cannot be explained by Clarke’s acceptance of a legislative conception of obligation.  Instead, we need to appeal to his epistemology
- In contrast to Suarez and Cudworth, therefore, Clarke separates rationalism and objectivism from naturalism. He agrees with naturalism insofar as he rejects voluntarism and a legislative conception of moral rightness, and therefore accepts intrinsic morality. Moreover, he believes that intrinsic morality can be grasped by rational reflexion on the objective facts about agents and actions. But he seems to have a more restrictive conception of the facts and the refelxion that are relevant. He replaces deliberation about the goal-directed nature of rational agents with inspection of the inherent character of acts apart from their context and their ends.²⁷ 
- Some moral disputes might be settled by the means Clarke offers. If, for instance, we wonder whether murder is wrong, we might simply be forgetting that the concept of murder is the concept of an unjustifiable homicide. Moreover, significant and complex moral disputes might turn on conceptual issues—if answers to conceptual questions may be diffciult to fnid. Clarke’s particular understanding of conceptual issues, however, seems to ensure that the only truths he can offer about fitness will be trivial and uninformative. 
- In some of these cases we can perhaps see why Clarke thinks the denial of a basic principle involves a contradiction. Perhaps he thinks it is part of the concept of God that God deserves honour and obedience from creatures like us. Similarly, he might argue that if we both accept a duty and reject the necessary means to carrying out we do not really believe that it is a duty. But it is more difficult to find such an account of the principle of equity. If I want to harm others for my advantage and want them to benefit me for my advantage, my will does not contradict itself. To reach a contradiction in cases such as this one, we have to begin from a different starting point, drawing on Cumberland’s claims about the impartiality of practical reason.³³ If I claim that it is reasonable for me, as a rational agent, to treat other rational agents, as rational agents, without regard for their interests, but unreasonable for others, as rational agents, to treat me, as a rational agent, without regard for my interests, then I contradict myself. I begin from claims about how it is reasonable for one rational agent to treat another, but then I contradict these claims in different cases, even though I have already agreed that the principles apply to all rational agents. 
- Even if we agree with Clarke’s view that we necessarily accept some principle of equity, we might doubt whether it has any significant moral content. He does not explain how more specific moral principles might emerge from this impartial point of view. Some of his remarks, however, suggest that he intends to derive them from impartiality. He claims that the principle of equity requires us ‘so to deal with every man, as in like circumstances we would reasonably expect he should deal with us’ (H ii 619 = R 241). He does not say simply that we should treat others as we would prefer them to treat us; for our preferences may themselves be self-centred and warped. He requires us to take an impartial view of our own desires as well. 
- Clarke does not rely on equity alone to derive positive moral content. He also recognizes ‘universal love or benevolence’, which requires us to aim at the greatest good we are capable of achieving for everyone.³⁶
- Some aspects of Clarke’s position are quite similar to Cumberland’s. They both recognize a benevolent God who aims at the welfare of the whole universe. Indeed Clarke maintains that the fact that morality promotes the universal welfare is both obvious in itself and a clear proof that morality is in accord with the will of God (H ii 621). He cites Cumberland in his support.⁴¹ Moreover, they both reject Hobbes’s attempt to reduce the natural basis of the laws of nature to mere counsels of narrow prudence.⁴² 
- Still, Clarke disagrees with Cumberland—more sharply than he makes clear—on some central issues. We have already seen that he rejects Cumberland’s voluntarism about morality and about obligation, and affrims that eternal ftinesses create obligations apart from any divine or human will. He also rejects utilitarianism more clearly than Cumberland rejects it. The eternal ftinesses that Clarke recognizes cannot all be captured by the principle of utility. In explaining why he rejects utilitarianism as a general account of morality, Clarke makes his conception of eternal fitnesses clearer. He gives a central place to benevolence, which he conceives in a way that allows a utilitarian interpretation. In his view, love requires that ‘we endeavour, by an universal benevolence, to promote the welfare and happiness of all men’. God shows the same benevolence towards us. In this description of benevolence Clarke recalls Cumberland’s view that practical reason aims at a common good; like Cumberland, Clarke does not say whether this should be understood in utilitarian quantitative terms. Utilitarianism, however, does not capture Clarke’s view of rightness and fitness as a whole. He recognizes principles connected with justice, and takes them to limit the application of the utilitarian principle. It would be difficult for him to avoid this position, given his moral epistemology. For his rationalism rests on intuitive convictions that certain kinds of actions and relations are fit and reasonable in themselves. We have to reject such convictions if we treat the principle of utility as the supreme moral principle. Hence the believer in eternal ftinesses had better not be a utilitarian. Clarke believes, for instance, that it is fti and reasonable in itself to keep a promise, show gratitude to a benefactor, avoid pain to an innocent person, and so on. Even if utility will not in fact require us to override these principles, a utilitarian has to deny that the relevant actions are fit and reasonable, and so morally obligatory, in themselves; they are reasonable only if they fit into an indirect utilitarian argument. 
- Since Clarke rejects a utilitarian explanation of the rightness of actions that he regards as fit in themselves, he argues that the general or common good is not the only basis for obligation. Another basis rests on the demands of equity, which requires that ‘we so deal with every man, as in like circumstances we would reasonably expect he should deal with us’ (H ii 619 = R 241). Since he is not a sentimentalist, Clarke sees no need to explain how the reciprocity connected with equity has any basis in our sentiments. 
- Equity and benevolence seem to be distinct. The characteristic of equity is reasonableness plus impartiality between myself and each other person, whereas the characteristic of benevolence is concern for the welfare of every other person. If, for instance, I would reasonably not want someone else to do what a benevolent person would do in my interest, then the rule of equity imposes some limit on the practice of benevolence. Clarke does not say whether universal benevolence aims at maximizing the quantity of good irrespective of its distribution. If this is the aim of benevolence, it may clash with equity. It is not clear why I would ‘reasonably expect’ someone else to treat me unequally simply because unequal treatment would increase the total happiness. Nor does Clarke suggest that reasonableness should be assessed purely by utilitarian criteria. Apparently, then, equitable treatment might conflict with maximizing utility. 
- Clarke agrees that on the whole the good of the universal creation coincides with what is right, and that God wills virtue to be rewarded by happiness. But he rejects an appeal to utility as the criterion of rightness. He mentions three features of utility: 
    - It is sometimes very difficult to tell what maximizes utility. Hutcheson’s indirect utilitarian defence of more specific principles and traits suggests that we need not face the uncertainties of calculating utility on every occasion on which we have to decide what it is right to do.⁴⁴ But one may doubt whether the indirect utilitarian defence succeeds, if it is applied to the specifci rules and traits that Clarke takes to be clearly right. 
    - Public utility varies from society to society. 
    - Public utility must be judged by the governors of each particular society. In contrast, the moral law has none of these features.⁴³ Clarke’s second and third objections raise the most important issues. He does not merely mean that it is unwise to rely on something as diffciult to discover and as variable as public utility. He means that we know moral principles lack features that they would have if they were really maxims for the promotion of utility. Moral requirements are clear and uniform in some cases where the demands of utility are obscure and variable. If a utilitarian view were correct, we would need to answer some complicated questions about utility before we could know that a certain type of action is morally right; but we do not need to answer all these questions. Even if the answers would eventually favour our moral principle, the fact that we do not need them shows that the principle is not based on predictions about utility.⁴⁵ Indirect utilitarianism does not entirely overcome this objection. Even if it avoids the diffciulty of facing obscure and diffciult questions about particular actions, it faces similar questions about rules and character traits. If our reason for accepting certain specific rules or virtues is clear independently of our beliefs about their contribution to utility, Clarke’s objection stands. 
- Clarke adds specifci objections to the breaking of promises on utilitarian grounds, pointing out that these breaches of faith may have bad consequences (H ii 630–1). Without directly criticizing Cumberland, he implicitly anticipates Maxwell’s explicit criticisms of Cumberland’s neglect of non-teleological moral principles. 
- The objection raises a serious question about one defence of a utilitarian account of morality.Sometimes utilitarians suggest that if they can give plausible arguments to show that recognized moral rules tend to maximize utility, they have vindicated a utilitarian position. In suggesting this, utilitarians imply that extensional equivalence between utilitarianism and recognized principles provides a sufficient defence of utilitarianism. If Clarke is right, however, extensional equivalence is not enough. If our reason for accepting the moral principles is independent of utility, mere extensional equivalence would not show that our moral principles are utilitarian, or that the principle of utility is the supreme moral principle. Clarke need not claim that all moral requirements are always clear, or that utility is never relevant to questions of moral rightness. He has a strong case if he can show that moral principles are sometimes clear independently of considerations of utility. If he is right about this, the utilitarian criterion is not the correct criterion of morality. 
- This argument is another version of Cudworth’s objection to Hobbes. Cudworth rejects the view that (1) the true principles of justice are those commanded by the sovereign, and (2) are true because they are commanded by the sovereign. Clarke argues against the view that (3) the true principles of morality maximize utility, and (4) are true because they maximize utility. Both Cudworth’s pair and Clarke’s pair of claims recall the pair of claims about piety and what the gods love that are discussed by Socrates and Euthyphro. Just as Cudworth argues that the truth of the first claim does not imply the truth of the second, Clarke argues that the truth of the third does not imply the truth of the fourth. Indeed, he argues that the third may be true, but the fourth is false. 
- Clarke does not refute utilitarianism, but he identifies a question that a utilitarian has to answer. A true moral theory should offer:
    - a criterion that identifies morally right actions
    - an account of the property that makes them right. Clarke argues that utilitarianism fails in the second task because we can see that the right-making property of right actions is a property that would still make them right even if they did not maximize utility. 
- A utilitarian might argue that we are simply wrong in supposing that true moral principles would still be true if they did not maximize utility. Clarke points out, however, that it may be difficult for a utilitarian to support this claim. A utilitarian theory has to appeal to some of our moral beliefs and convictions against others; indeed, it seems plausible because it relies on our strong convictions about the goodness of benevolence. But if it violates our strong convictions about the sort of property that makes right actions right, we may reasonably ask whether our convictions about benevolence ought to override our convictions about right-making properties. 
- Clarke, however, takes bare awareness to motivate us. He believes that the simple grasp of a moral principle motivates a well-ordered will to choose the right action. A sound understanding necessarily grasps the true moral principles, and a sound will necessarily acts on them.⁴⁸ We need no special explanation, involving some non-cognitive element, of why someone’s will follows principles of morality; that is just a fact about a well-ordered will. We need an explanation only when the will goes wrong. 
- In saying this Clarke rejects psychological hedonism; he denies that an action becomes intelligible only by being traced back to a desire for pleasure. The hedonist argues that the non-hedonist stops with a brute fact; and the non-hedonist replies that this allegedly brute fact is no less intelligible than the desire for pleasure. Clarke defends his rationalism about motivation in the same way. In his view, no further desire should be introduced to explain why a well-ordered will adheres to the true moral principles. The sentimentalist offers a further explanation, in claiming that some specific desire or sentiment is characteristic of the well-ordered will. Clarke suggests that the further explanation sought by an anti-rationalist is no better than the further explanation for moral motivation sought by a hedonist. If we stop with a non-hedonist desire, why not stop with motivation without desire? This argument from parity raises a large question about the assumptions that underlie the whole dispute between rationalists and sentimentalists. The two sides seem to differ partly about when and why it is appropriate to end explanations by appeal to brute facts. But how is this dispute to be resolved? If we stop with brute facts, how do we tell that one is intrinsically more intelligible than another? Even if we are not psychological hedonists, we may think it is arbitrary to stop with Clarke’s brute facts about motivation. The stopping point should not be arbitrary; we want some better reason for regarding a certain motive as characteristic and appropriate for morality than the mere claim that it is no more unintelligible than others that have been picked. In this sharp contrast between pure rationalism and hedonist anti-rationalism about motivation, eudaemonism deserves consideration, though Clarke does not consider it. The point of eudaemonism is not to trace all desires to some single type of desire that is taken to be intelligible in itself; on this point it differs from hedonism. Its point is to make one motive intelligible by its connexion with other motives in the pursuit of a final good. A similar conclusion about justification is worth considering. A hedonist account of the basis of morality claims to show not only how morality is psychologically possible, but also that it is rationally justifiable, since it promotes a genuine good. A non-hedonist account of moral motivation seems to leave a reasonable question unanswered, if it does not show how it is reasonable to act on the motives of the virtuous person. Clarke seems to leave unanswered an important question that both hedonists and non-hedonist eudaemonists try to answer. 
- Clarke agrees with Cudworth in using Suarezian arguments against voluntarism to attack Hobbes. Some of the questions that he intends to answer with his own account of moral properties are clearer from his criticism of Hobbes. Cudworth argues that Hobbes’s legislative view of morality forces him into a vicious regress; but, as we saw, Hobbes might avoid a vicious regress of legislation based on morality based on legislation if he claims that legislative morality has a non-moral basis. Clarke attacks this answer by arguing that we have moral obligations in situations where, according to Hobbes, we have none. If Cudworth is right, Hobbes must acknowledge at least one moral obligation in the state of nature, and hence prior to any legislation—the obligation to obey a legitimate legislator. If Clarke is right, Hobbes must recognize many obligations prior to legislation. Clarke tries to show that (1) Hobbes admits moral obligations in the state of nature, and (2) Hobbes gives no good reasons for denying such moral obligations. 
- - Clarke, can Hobbes speak of a ‘right of nature’, and hence recognize a morally justifeid liberty, without assuming that some moral principles apply to the state of nature? For if I have a moral right to do x, I am morally protected in doing x, and you would be wrong to prevent me from doing x.⁵⁰ How, then, can Hobbes claim that people have rights in the state of nature, while denying that there is anything that it is morally right or wrong to do? If Hobbes were clearly using ‘right’ so as to mean ‘moral right’, so that it implies some moral protection for some liberty, Clarke would be justified. But Clarke has imported moral content that Hobbes does not intend. For Hobbes identifies the right with a liberty, which is simply the absence of external impediments. His explicit use of ‘having a right’, therefore, does not imply that the liberty in question is morally justifiable. In his explicit sense of ‘right’, we have a right to preserve ourselves in the state of nature, if we are not overcome by superior individuals or groups. We have the right because we are free, and we are free simply insofar as we are not prevented. But this sort of right does not imply that other people are morally obliged to leave me alone, and Hobbes does not recognize any such obligation. If Hobbes were clearly using ‘right’ so as to mean ‘moral right’, so that it implies some moral protection for some liberty, Clarke would be justified. But Clarke has imported moral content that Hobbes does not intend. For Hobbes identifies the right with a liberty, which is simply the absence of external impediments. His explicit use of ‘having a right’, therefore, does not imply that the liberty in question is morally justifiable. In his explicit sense of ‘right’, we have a right to preserve ourselves in the state of nature, if we are not overcome by superior individuals or groups. We have the right because we are free, and we are free simply insofar as we are not prevented. But this sort of right does not imply that other people are morally obliged to leave me alone, and Hobbes does not recognize any such obligation. If Hobbes sticks to this non-normative conception of the right of nature, he must allow this right to extend beyond self-preservation. If our right to kill for self-preservation simply means that nothing prevents killing for self-preservation in the state of nature, it is equally true that there we have a natural right to kill and torture just for fun. Clarke points out that Hobbes is committed to this broad conception of the right of nature.⁵¹ But in fact Hobbes does not allow as broad a right of nature as he would have to allow if he stuck to a non-normative sense of ‘right’.⁵² In picking out the right of self-preservation and remaining silent about the other natural rights that follow from his non-normative sense of ‘right’, he seems to restrict the scope of rights in ways that his theory does not justify.⁵³ If he restricts our rights because he believes we have a morally justified or blameless liberty to pursue the means to our self-preservation, but no such liberty to behave with wanton cruelty, he recognizes moral constraints in the state of nature.⁵⁴ Hobbes might reply, however, that in speaking of rights, he is referring to what is allowed by right reason, but right reason is purely prudential, referring to the agent’s own interest. If the only rational considerations applying in the state of nature are prudential considerations, Clarke has not shown that moral considerations apply in the state of nature. Clarke is right, therefore, to criticize Hobbes’s appeal to the right of nature, but his criticisms do not force Hobbes to recognize morality in the state of nature. 
- But Clarke offers an objection that replies to this appeal to prudence. He argues that Hobbes cannot plausibly claim that the only rational constraint on behaviour in the state of nature is prudential. In Clarke’s view, we recognize moral obligations in the state of nature. We give them some weight, even if they do not guide our conduct in the same way as they would in a more stable situation.⁵⁵ Hobbes argues: 
    - Some ordinary moral rules do not bind us when they impede selfpreservation. 
    - Therefore, they are not binding in the state of nature, in which they impede self-preservation. 
    - Therefore, the only rational principles binding us in the state of nature are principles of self-preservation. Clarke points out that Hobbes’s first claim does not justify the second or the third; it shows only that ordinary moral rules do not bind us in the state of nature on occasions when they impede self-preservation. But even in the state of nature, observance of ordinary moral rules does not always impede self-preservation; when it does not, we are obliged, for anything that Hobbes has shown, to observe them. Hobbes may acknowledge the considerations mentioned by Clarke, since he does not treat the right of nature as a right to do immoral actions that are not justifeid by appeal to self-preservation. Why should he refuse to allow that we have a natural right to amuse ourselves in every way, however immoral, that neither advances nor threatens our selfpreservation? He seems to agree, at least implicitly, with Clarke’s view that the obligation to observe moral rules is still in force whenever it does not impede self-preservation. Hobbes points out that we take some ordinary moral rules to be in abeyance in the state of nature because observance of them might threaten self-preservation. Clarke answers that the peculiar dangers of the state of nature modify our ordinary moral obligations, but do not cancel moral obligations that do not impede self-preservation. If moral considerations matter even in the state of nature, and even when they are not means to self-preservation, they are not simply rules derived from self-preservation.⁵⁶ If Hobbes were right, some actions would be morally indifferent that, in our ordinary view, are not indifferent. 
    - Clarke argues further that Hobbes must recognize moral obligations in the state of nature, if he is to justify the formation of a state. If we all killed and tortured whenever we felt like it, the result would be the destruction of humanity. The sort of obligation that Hobbes must assume to get us out of the state of nature is the very sort whose existence he denies.⁵⁷ Hobbes, therefore, picks and chooses arbitrarily among the laws of nature, claiming that some of them do not oblige in foro externo outside the commonwealth, whereas the law enjoining us to seek peace obliges us in the state of nature, since it is the basis for the social compact. Hobbes has no good reason to single out this one law of nature.⁵⁸ Clarke takes Hobbes to assume that observance of the other laws of nature is obligatory if their observance does not impede self-preservation, and that therefore self-preservation cannot justify the aggression of the person who has not yet suffered aggression. And so he argues that Hobbes must recognize moral obligations that he professes to reject. 
    - Similarly, according to Clarke, Hobbes’s attempt to rest the foundation of the commonwealth on a covenant requires recognition of moral obligations that Hobbes professes to deny. Clarke assumes that Hobbes wants the covenant to impose some moral obligation, and he argues that it cannot do this unless we already recognize some obligation, apart from the covenant itself, to keep covenants.⁵⁹ Just as Cudworth argues that a command cannot itself create the obligation to obey commands, Clarke argues that a promise cannot create the obligation to keep a promise. This argument presupposes that Hobbes argues for the commonwealth on moral grounds. We might take him to argue that morality demands peace so that the other demands of morality can be properly fulfliled. To say this is to express a moral demand that Kant identifies with the postulate of public right.⁶⁰ Such a demand implies that some moral obligations apart from counsels of self-preservation already hold in the state of nature. 
- Clarke answers Hobbes by accepting the first three claims and rejecting the fourth. He offers a different defence of the state’s monopoly of the use of force. Compulsion removes temptations to violate moral obligations, but it does not necessarily create the obligations that would otherwise be easy to violate.⁶¹ The existence of a state may also imply new obligations. Perhaps, for instance, I ought to be ready to commit myself more unreservedly when I know that other people will be compelled to keep their part of the bargain.⁶² But recognizing these facts about compulsion does not make compulsion necessary for obligation.⁶³ Hobbes’s insistence on compulsion shows us one reason why a state is necessary to fulfil some moral demands, but it does not tell us as much as he supposes about the nature or basis of these demands. Apparently, then, people in the state of nature still have reason to act on moral principles, even though circumstances may dictate that they will not act in the ways they would act in a state. To show that we have no moral obligations in the state of nature, Hobbes needs some further argument besides the arguments that Clarke refutes. 
- we may agree with him that in the state of nature we have moral obligations independent of self-preservation. Even if we cannot reasonably be expected to ignore the demands of self-preservation, we can reasonably be expected to treat other people with some consideration for their interests in circumstances where we neither gain nor lose anything by it. The moral obligation or permission to preserve ourselves does not include a moral permission to violate moral principles that do not affect our self-preservation. If we fnid Clarke’s arguments plausible on these points, we can readily explain why they are plausible, by pointing out that even in the state of nature people benefti from considerate treatment by others. Our needs and interests are similar in some ways both inside and outside a commonwealth that has the power to coerce. 
- Clarke does not believe that moral judgments are rational because they are the conclusions of complex calculations of self-interest, or because they depend on any other complicated process of reasoning. As he points out, many mathematical and logical judgments appear to be immediate, but do not seem to belong to a sense. 





#                  Difficulties

- Clarke and Balguy agree with Parker’s conception of happiness (His argument against Greek Moralists assumes a broadly hedonistic conception of happiness, which leads him to misunderstand the Stoic and the Aristotelian and Platonic position), and hence with his assertion that Greek moral philosophy cannot assure the appropriate connexion between virtue and happiness.⁴²
- he quotes Cumberland selectively, choosing a passage in which Cumberland denies that the natural law is arbitrary or mutable. Following Cumberland, Clarke asserts that God’s goodness constrains the scope of divine willing.¹¹ But he neither mentions nor discusses the voluntarism in Cumberland’s views on obligation.¹² 
- The teleological argument favoured by Aquinas and Suarez does not fit Clarke’s view that we ought to be able to see the rightness of benevolence simply by considering what it is. In their view, we must consider how benevolence fits into other aspects of human nature. We cannot simply consider benevolence by itself, but we must also consider its relation to human nature. 
- These three moralists explain claims about morality by appeal to some notion of contradiction, but they understand ‘contradiction’ in different ways that match their conceptions of fitness. Suarez explains the sense in which God would be making a contradiction true if he were to change moral rightness and wrongness. Given the facts about rational nature and the fact that, necessarily, right and wrong are what accords with and confilcts with rational nature, a change in right and wrong, without a corresponding change in human nature, would make it true that the same action both is and is not in accord with rational nature. To make the killing of innocent persons cease to be wrong is not contradictory in itself, but it leads to a contradiction, given the facts about rational nature, about killing, and about rightness.²⁵ Cudworth also speaks of contradiction, but he does not explain so clearly where the contradiction lies. Clarke resolves the obscurity in Cudworth, but he does not return to Suarez; he asserts a direct contradiction between the idea of killing an innocent person and the idea of moral rightness, similar to the contradiction between having angles adding up to 200 degrees and being a triangle. This version of an appeal to contradiction, as opposed to the naturalist version, is effectively criticized by Pufendorf.²⁶ 
- It is difficult to separate metaphysics from epistemology in Clarke’s conception of eternal fitnesses, and it is difficult to say which is prior to which. He seems to connect two controversial doctrines: (1) He explains the sort of contradiction and fitness relevant to naturalist ethical claims by appeal to logical and conceptual relations. (2) He explains our grasp of logical and conceptual relations by appeal to self-evidence and obviousness.²⁸ The frist move is disputable, but not surprising, since the appeal to contradiction can be clearly and intelligibly explained by reference to mathematical entities. The second move is initially appealing, since it seems to show that an opponent who denies claims about ftiness is simply failing to see something that should be obvious to any mind free of confusion. 
- But this apparent advantage of Clarke’s conception of fitness has severe costs. Three disadvantages are especially evident: 
    - Clarke makes it difficult to explain how there could ever be reasonable dispute or uncertainty about what is morally right. His explanation of fitness through immediacy makes it look as though moral disputes must always result from gross confusion or irrationality. The naturalist explanation of ftiness by appeal to nature at least shows why it might sometimes be difficult to answer moral questions. 
    - As Clarke understands the obvious, it seems rather uninformative. If we ask what is wrong with deliberately killing innocent people, Clarke seems to answer that the meaning of ‘innocent person’ includes a reference to the wrongness of deliberately killing them. Hence the answer to our question will be that it is wrong to kill an innocent person because an innocent is one whom it is wrong to kill. If we want to know why it is wrong to kill a person who has done us no wrong, Clarke’s appeal to the defniition of innocence does not answer our question. 
    - The appeal to obviousness suggests that the appeals to fitness and to nature are idle; the recognition of obviousness seems to provide all the explanation that Clarke takes to be available. 
- When Clarke replaces fitness to rational nature with bare fitness, it is difficult to see that a claim about fitness explains or justifies the claim that an action is morally right. Reference to fitness does not seem to introduce any further feature that might support the judgment about rightness. Clarke’s conception of fitness may lead us in the wrong direction, if we try to explain it through self-evidence. For the most plausible explanation of the self-evidence that he attributes to judgments of fitness treats them as purely conceptual judgments. We may well find that this is too restrictive a conception of moral judgment. 
- Clarke does not point out the possibility of deriving a principle of benevolence from the obligation to prudence combined with the obligation to equity.³⁹ If we rationally wish to promote our own interest, and we recognize that what is rational for us to want for ourselves is equally rational for others to want for themselves, an appeal to equity justifeis the extension of benevolence to everyone. Clarke’s explicit argument appeals to the principle of equity to justify universal benevolence, but he does not appeal to the rationality of prudence. This may be because he treats the principle of prudence as derivative from other duties, not as a rational principle in its own right. Here Butler improves on him.⁴⁰ 
- Though Clarke offers this strong argument against utilitarianism, he does not consider an obvious utilitarian reply. He concedes that morality prescribes universal benevolence; but if universal benevolence must aim at maximum utility, how can the requirements of morality be clear independently of questions about utility? Clarke might try different replies to the utilitarian: 
    - He might concede the utilitarian point for benevolence, but deny it for equity, and claim that equity sometimes overrides benevolence - The frist reply is hazardous.⁴⁶ For if utilitarian considerations take such a firm hold on one aspect of morality, they may cast doubt on Clarke’s claim that some crucial moral principles are clear independently of benevolence. We might doubt whether equity really overrides benevolence; and Clarke does not face this question. 
    - He might deny that benevolence aims at maximum utility - It might be better to challenge the utilitarian analysis of benevolence,⁴⁷ and to argue that benevolence does not imply the additive attitude to welfare that the utilitarian assumes. If utilitarians reject our actual attitude of benevolence in favour of a more utilitarian attitude, they owe us some further argument. 
- If we are convinced by this explanation of the moral obligations that Clarke recognizes in the state of nature, we may doubt his account of the character of moral principles. He suggests that it is fit in itself to keep promises and to show gratitude to benefactors. He might make this uninterestingly true by making the relevant obligation part of the definition of ‘promise’ and ‘benefactor’; but if he defends himself in this way, he invites us to ask why we should recognize such things as promises and benefactors (as he defnies them). His discussion of Hobbes suggests that obligations belong to promises and to benefactors because of their relation to human nature and needs. In that case, the keeping of promises is not really fit ‘in itself’; it is appropriate to human nature and needs. 
- Because Clarke fails to examine his appeals to self-evidence any further, he fails to present a clear alternative to sentimentalism. By appealing simply to claims of self-evidence, he leaves himself open to the objection (urged by Hutcheson against Burnet’s defence of Clarke) that what strikes a rationalist as self-evident is simply what appeals to the moral sense, and that rationalists misrepresent their affective reactions as the conclusions of some purely rational argument. Clarke has no good defence against this objection unless he goes beyond a mere appeal to self-evidence. He needs to show why the appearance of self-evidence is a reasonable one, and why there are some rational grounds for believing that the appearance is correct in one or another case. But if we show these things, we fnid that an appeal to self-evidence is unhelpful. Clarke’s position, then, is unstable; but it offers some room for a more thorough criticism of sentimentalism resulting in a more systematic and more convincing alternative. His remarks on Hobbes suggest that this alternative requires a more favourable attitude to naturalism than Clarke normally displays. 