- He is natural law moralist
- Morality depends on natural law, and hence on Divine commands, and that the natural foundation of morality consists in natural, but non-moral, goodness and badness.
- He critiques Hobbes
- He thinks that Grotius argued from effect to the cause, appealing to the shared sentiments of different people at different times to establish the existence of natural law
- We will find that the laws of nature are those principles that promote thegreatest common goodofrational beings, andthat they aresupportedby divinesanctions.
- Cumberland intends his account of the laws of nature to refute Hobbes. He especially attacks Hobbes’s account of human nature, of the state of nature as a state of war, and of natural right. At these points Hobbes reveals his basic errors about the content and aim of the laws of nature, and about our reason for following them. Cumberland argues against Hobbes that the laws of nature are not basically counsels of self-preservation, to be justified by their role in preserving the peace of the commonwealth and keeping us out of the state of nature. According to Cumberland, the laws of nature aim at the common good of rational agents, and this aim by itself makes it reasonable for rational agents to observe them.
- On the one hand, he rejects intrinsic morality; like Culverwell, he argues that morality and obligation come together and both require law. On the other hand, he does not agree with Hobbes and Pufendorf in supposing that the non-moral natural goods are simply those that promote one’s own advantage. 
- Though he praises Grotius’ treatment of natural law (Introd. §1), he takes a voluntarist position, which Pufendorf cites in his support.⁵ He accepts Suarez’s strict understanding of ‘law’ (without mentioning Suarez), and criticizes those who speak of the laws of nature loosely, without deriving them from the will of a legislator. He agrees with Selden’s view that if laws of nature were simply rational precepts, they would lack the authority that belongs to law.⁶ Laws are ‘practical propositions, with rewards and punishments annexed, promulged by competent authority’ (Introd. §6 = P 253). To show that there are laws of nature, therefore, is not simply to show that there are rational moral principles, but to show also that they are the work of a legislator who imposes sanctions.⁷
- Cumberland distinguishes two elements of a law of nature. The ‘precept’ gives the content of a natural law, indicating the particular way in which it aims at the common good of rational beings. The sanction consists of the reward God assigns to observance of the law, or the punishment God assigns to the violation.
The ‘sanction’ that Cumberland has in mind is not confined to rewards and punishments that God artificially attaches to good and bad conduct, by (for instance) rewarding good conduct with temporal prosperity in this life (as the Psalmists suppose) or with happiness in the afterlife. The relevant sanction also includes the natural and essential contribution of virtue to our own well-being.⁸ The fact that, as the ancient moralists claim, virtue promotes happiness appears to Cumberland to support his claim that God attaches a sanction to good and bad conduct. He does not believe that we must regard natural law as divine law if we are to recognize that sanctions are attached to it. In recognizing it as divine law we recognize that the connexion between virtue and happiness is the result of God’s intention to impose this law on us. If we left God aside, we could not justifiably treat the natural law as genuine law, but we would still have good reason to obey it because of its natural sanction. 
- Contrary to Hobbes, Cumberland takes the laws of nature to be prescriptions about the common good of rational beings. They achieve the good of an individual rational being insofar as her good is a part of the common good. Hence observance of the uni-versal law of nature promotes the good of each individual who is part of the whole.⁹ This does not imply that in any given society the good of the whole coincides with the good of each part; for in a defective community, no less than in a diseased or injured body, the good of the whole may involve some harm to a particular part.¹⁰
- This description of natural law agrees with Suarez’s claim that natural law is genuine law, and hence requires a legislator. Cumberland also follows Suarez in taking obligation to require legislation. He rejects Hobbes’s view that ‘obligation’ is properly applied to the mental state of the person obliged. He applies it to the imposer of the obligation, and therefore takes the divine will and command to oblige.¹² If he is right to claim that the natural law essentially carries obligation, and that obligation involves command, he is right to infer that the natural law requires divine legislation.
- He finds talk of ‘agreement’ obscure until it is explained by reference to the preservation and perfection of the subject with which an action ‘agrees’. But then, after excplanation, he agrees with those who say that natural law prescribes actions that fit human nature.
- In recognizing this natural good antecedent to legislation, Cumberland agrees with Suarez. But he rejects Suarez’s further claim that this natural good is sufficient for morality. In his view, the moral good requires legislation.¹⁵
- He concedes to Culverwell that the perfection of natural goods gives us an intrinsic reason (antecedent to any divine legislation) to pursue them, but he denies that this is honestas or morality.¹⁶ 
- This division between the natural and the moral good affects Cumberland’s explanation of his account of the natural law. When the natural law is defnied as aiming at the common good, ‘good’ refers to purely natural good, not to the moral good. To understand it as referring to the moral good would be to introduce a vicious circle, since moral good has to be defnied by reference to natural law.¹⁷ Only non-moral goods constitute the common good of rational agents. Morally right actions, therefore, should be understood teleologically and instrumentally, as means to non-moral goods.¹⁸ 
- Cumberland does not consider Suarez’s view that natural goods are sufficient for intrinsic morality that is antecedent to law. According to Suarez, natural law is just because it corresponds to intrinsic morality, but Cumberland implicitly rejects that view. Perhaps he agrees with Culverwell’s view that the distinctive features of moral obligation require law, or perhaps he agrees with Suarez’s view that obligation in general requires law. But he does not confront Suarez’s reasons for distinguishing the duties (debita) of intrinsic morality from obligations, which depend on law. 
- He recognizes that the ancient moralists are eudaemonists, who take the ultimate end to be the agent’s happiness. But he does not confuse their eudaemonism with hedonism, and he rejects hedonism. He takes activity and pleasure to be inseparably connected, and both to be necessary for happiness. Happiness is ‘a certain aggregate, whose parts we are continually enjoying’
- Virtue is necessary for happinessЮ
- He agrees with the ancient moralists who take virtue to be necessary for happiness.²⁰ Among these he agrees with those who take virtue to be a component of happiness, not merely a means to it. But he rejects the Stoic view that virtue is the only good; he endorses Cicero’s argument²¹ that the Stoic view takes away the point of virtuous action by denying that the effects it aims at are good.²² 
- Though Cumberland agrees with these aspects of Greek eudaemonism, he is not a eudaemonist, since he does not agree that one’s own happiness is or ought to be one’s supreme end.²³ His reason for rejecting eudaemonism is not that he believes in a conflict between one’s own good and the common good; on the contrary, he believes that one promotes one’s own good by advancing the common good of which it is a part.²⁴ But he does not believe that the justifying reason for pursuit of the common good depends entirely on its connexion with one’s own good. In his view, it is independently reasonable to pursue the common good, and it would be unreasonable to follow some rule that does not aim at everyone’s happiness. Even apart from any reference to the will of God, it is unreasonable to claim to be rationally justified in dominating others while admitting that they have an equally good reason for dominating oneself.²⁵ 
- Since they can all reasonably agree on this end, it is the end that rational beings, as such, must pursue.²⁶ The ‘sanction’ of the natural law does not consist simply in its promotion of my private interest. A further ‘reward’ is the fact that the moral law promotes the common good.
- he makes it clear that he believes in two irreducibly different aims of practical reason.²⁸ 
- Cumberland’s view of practical reason assumes that some natural goods are both non-instrumental and non-hedonic. These include the virtues of character recognized by the Greek moralists (Though they have moral goodness only because of this relation to a divine command. ).²⁹ He therefore rejects the view of Hobbes and Locke, that the only natural goods are the pleasant (iucundum) and the advantageous (utile). But he disagrees with Suarez’s view that the morally right (honestum) is one of the natural goods. In Cumberland’s view, the natural goods that are good in their own nature also promote the common good, and may be pursued for the sake of the common good, apart from any law. But these goods cannot be the source of an obligation or a duty (debitum), and so cannot be honesta, without reference to a law. Hence he rejects Suarez’s belief in natural duties prior to obligation and law. 
- he rejects Hobbes’s claims about the right of nature. He argues that the exercise of a Hobbesian right to do what I please in the state of nature would violate the demands of practical reason, and therefore go beyond my rights.³² 
- According to Cumberland, the fact that virtue is a part of happiness is a sanction attached to virtue by a legislator. 
- - Cumberland’s argument to show that morality is as immutable as human nature confilcts with Ockham’s view that God is free to change what accords with human nature, and with Scotus’ view that God is free to command us not to act in accord with human nature.⁵⁰ In Cumberland's view, God necessarily wills that we act in accord with our nature, and therefore necessarily wills the common good of rational beings (with ‘good’ understood in a non-moral sense). depends on the contingent fact that God is benevolent. If this were a contingent fact about God, it would also be a contingent fact that God legislates rules that promote the common good of rational agents; for if God were malevolent, rules designed to cause suffering to rational agents would be morally right. To avoid making rightness dependent on the arbitrary will of God, Cumberland insists that God is essentially good, and therefore is not free to legislate evil. 
- For Hobbes, the question about why we ought to obey God is easily answered.
He derives the obligation (and hence motivation) to obey God from God’s overwhelming power; he recognizes no distinction, for moral purposes, between power and authority (or legitimacy). Cumberland agrees with Cudworth in rejecting this basis for the moral requirement to obey God 
- Even Hobbes, who goes furthest in a voluntarist direction, believes that what fits human nature is independent of God’s legislative will; that is why the laws of nature are counsels of self-preservation. But Hobbes does not believe that God commands obedience to these natural laws because they preserve human society; the commands are not an exercise of God’s benevolence or of God’s care for creation, but of God’s power. Culverwell, Locke, Cumberland, and Pufendorf reject this part of Hobbes’s view; they agree that in some way God necessarily chooses to command observance of the natural law that preserves human society. On this point they agree with Suarez. They differ from Suarez, and from one another, in their views about whether the element of natural law that is independent of command and will is also morality. None of them defends Suarez’s combination of naturalism (about right and wrong) and voluntarism (about obligation and law).
- He abandon Culverwell’s unsatisfactory compromise that we cannot recognise intrinsic rightness without recognising a requirement (debitum). He prefers a more thoroughly voluntarist position that rejects intrinsic rightness. 
- without a divine command some courses of action are unreasonable, and others are rationally appropriate, but no action is morally right or wrong because none is obligatory
- Hobbes, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all reject intrinsic rightness.
- To a limited extent, Hobbes believes in intrinsic moral properties, since he believes that the moral virtues are simply those states that promote self-preservation as means to peaceful and commodious living. But he does not believe that rightness (honestas) consists in anything beyond advantage (commodum); on this point Suarez, Grotius, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all disagree with him. 
- Aquinas and Suarez find the basis for moral rightness and justice in this common good, determined by the nature of human beings as rational and social animals. This aspect of human nature makes it appropriate to form communities in which individuals regard one another as proper objects of concern for their own sake, and not simply as means to one’s own self-confnied ends.³³ According to this naturalist view, the recognition of these facts about human beings gives us sufficient reason to pursue the honestum as part of our own good, and hence to accept morality. If these claims about nature and rational agency are correct, neither the advantageous nor the honestum depends on divine commands. Grotius accepts this naturalist view. He combines the Aristotelian appeal to the social nature of human beings with Stoic claims about conciliation (oikeioˆsis), and forms his own view of natural human sociality.³⁴ He agrees that acceptance of human sociality is a sufficient basis for the acceptance of natural rightness. Cumberland agrees with him, except that he takes facts about human sociality to make it rational, not morally right, to pursue the common good.³⁵ 





#                  Difficulties

- He might claim that if the common end is the common good, including each person’s individual good, we can and should all agree to pursue it, because it is non-competitive. But we might still doubt whether this is so. Perhaps we can agree on pursuit of a common good, because we all hope to get our own good out of it; but it does not immediately follow that I have as good a reason to pursue the common good for its own sake as I have to pursue my own good. 
- According to Cumberland, the promotion of non-moral goodness is the whole of morality, if it is prescribed by divine law. But this account still reduces morality to an instrumental status.⁴⁰ Cum-
berland claims that moral principles are commanded by God simply as means to the public good; but this account of moral obligation makes it a purely prudential, not a moral, bond. 
- Cumberland’s view, according to Maxwell, overlooks the regulative role of morality in relation to the public good. It is morally permissible to pursue the public good only insofar as it does not violate morality.⁴² If promotion of the public good requires injustice, for instance, it is open to moral objection; hence moral requirements are not exhausted by the requirement to pursue the public good. It applies to Cumberland’s view because he restricts the good promoted by morality to natural good, which does not include moral good. 
- Maxwell believes that Cumberland demotes morality to instrumental prudence by subor-dinating it to the pursuit of the non-moral good; Cumberland does not see that morality deserves to be chosen for its own sake, and carries an obligation within itself. Hence, according to Maxwell, Cumberland overlooks the obligation that belongs to morality in its own right, apart from any sanction that God attaches to it.⁴⁵ According to Cumberland, the fact that virtue is a part of happiness is a sanction attached to virtue by a legislator. Maxwell takes this view to assume the character of virtue itself is distinct from the aspect of virtue that promotes happiness; otherwise that aspect of it could not be the result of ‘attachment’.
He objects that virtue must be right and obligatory independently of the sanction if the sanction is rightly ‘attached’ to it.
- Some of Cumberland’s arguments for his legislative thesis about morality seem to be open to this objection from Suarez. The fact that actions have natural consequences affecting our welfare does not show that God is a legislator, or that moral goodness depends on God’s communicating divine law through a command. But Cumberland seems to confuse legislation with creation in his claims about sanctions. The fact that virtue has certain sanctions ‘attached’ to it, in the broad sense of ‘attached’ that covers essential properties, shows nothing about God’s legislative will. It is simply a fact about the natures of created things.
- Exploration of Maxwell’s objections, therefore, reveals a serious difficulty in Cumberland’s position. Maxwell claims that since morality is good and obligatory in itself, it possesses its goodness and its obligatory character independently of the sanction attached by divine legislation. He may have misunderstood Cumberland’s broad use of ‘sanction’ and ‘attach’. But if we allow Cumberland a broad enough use of these terms to answer Maxwell, we also cast doubt on Cumberland’s claims about the extent of divine legislation in morality. For a broad use of ‘sanction’ includes non-legislative ‘sanctions’ that come from God as creator; the presence of these sanctions does not show that morality depends on divine legislation. 
- Cumberland argues that the authority of a human ruler is based on two conditions: (1) the necessity of rule for achieving the public good, and (2) the legitimacy of the ruler, making it right for us to obey. According to Cumberland, this second condition is established by reference to a divine command requiring obedience to the laws of nature that enjoin actions necessary for the public good. But, as Maxwell sees, we cannot rely on the same two conditions to show that God is a legitimate ruler. For God’s right to command us to do what is needed to promote the public good cannot be derived from any higher authority than God; hence (according to Cumberland’s view of legitimacy) God is not a legitimate ruler. God’s title to rule must rest entirely on the frist condition; since we care, for non-moral reasons, about the promotion of the public good, and obedience to God’s commands allows us to promote the public good, we have a non-moral reason to obey God’s commands. Hence God’s authority is less firmly established than the authority of human rulers.
- while Cumberland seeks to refute Hobbes, he still accepts some of the basic elements in Hobbes’s position. Maxwell argues that Cumberland fails to recognize that divine rewards and punishments presuppose the rightness and wrongness of certain courses of action, and so cannot create it.
- His voluntarism implies that the promotion of the common good of rational agents would not be the supreme principle of morality unless it had been commanded by God. But he seems to agree that, apart from any divine command, it is recognized as the supreme principle of practical reason. He must claim, then, that this supreme principle, even though it is impartially concerned for the good of rational agents, is not a moral principle until God has commanded it. It is difficult to justify this restriction on the scope of morality. 
- Serious objections that face Cumberland arise from his rejection of intrinsic morality; but his emphasis on practical reason raises the legitimate suspicion that he appeals to intrinsic morality after all