# Difficulties

- We can illustrate this point through one of the examples often used against Kant, the case of the ‘conscientious Nazi’ who overcomes his reluctance to kill innocent Jews because he believes it to be his duty.²⁵ This case offers a counter-example to Kant only if two conditions are satisfied: 
    - The Nazi’s conviction about his duty is the result of an honest and impartial examination of the source of the conviction. Let us suppose (contrary to historical fact) that the Nazi satisfies the first condition. 
    - He has good reason, which he ought to have seen, to trust his reluctance. He still might not satisfy the second condition:
        - If he reasonably believes that he is reluctant only because he cannot stand the sight of blood, he might recall that he was right to overcome this reluctance in order to help injured people to safety; hence he might reasonably conclude that his reluctance is irrational, and should not persuade him to act against his presumed conscientious convictions. The mere fact that his squeamishness at the sight of blood would lead to the objectively right action in this case does not show that he would have been subjectively right to follow it. 
        - If, on the contrary, he would have been subjectively right to follow his emotion, it is difficult to see a sharp conflict with following one’s conscience. For any justification we might give for following the recalcitrant emotions would have to say why they are likely to be reliable in certain cases; but any such likelihood is already considered by a reflective rational agent forming a rational judgment. If the ‘conscientious Nazi’ has failed to consider his reasons for trusting his emotional reactions, he fails to meet the first condition mentioned above; for his judgment does not rest on honest and impartial examination. Hence he is not really ‘conscientious’ in the way that would create a counter-example to Kant. 