- He does not treat ScholaAristotle and Scholastics as his primary authorities. Rather, he relise on Patristic authority, especially on early orthodox writers.
- Grotius affirms the existence of a natural right (ius) that proceeds ‘from principles internal to a human being’. They are internal to us not only because we know them by nature, but also because they are appropriate for rational agents with our nature.
- He signals his agreement when he says that his remarks would still have some standing even if we were to grant that God does not exist or that he is not concerned with human affairs.
- His initial discussion is confined to the existence of a right (ius), not a law (lex), of nature. In asking whether there is a right (ius) of nature, he takes himself to be asking whether anything is just (iustum) by nature, apart from positive legislation; in affirming that there is something just by nature, he rejects Carneades’ sceptical position
- He distinguish obligation from an advice, but he does not say whether every duty is also an obligation
- Grotius describes natural right, understood as law (lex), as including two elements: 
    - the moral wrongness or necessity of some action, because of its inappropriateness or appropriateness to rational nature. The intrinsic rightness and wrongness of actions does not depend on any divine legislation; God prescribes and forbids actions as being intrinsically right and wrong. 
    - the consequent divine prohibition or command
- Insofar as Grotius takes natural right (ius) to be law (lex), he takes it to require a divine command. On this point he seems to agree with Suarez
- But even natural right, which proceeds from principles internal to a human being, can be ascribed to God, since he willed that such principles should exist in us. God’s legislative will has no role in the existence of natural right, but simply makes natural right clearer by issuing specific commands. Here, therefore, Grotius refers to God as creator, not as legislator; he does not endorse voluntarism about natural law or morality. Like Suarez, he acknowledges God’s creative will as the source of human beings with their nature, and hence as the source of naturally right and wrong actions; but this does not imply that natural right and wrong are the result of divine legislation. Though it is up to God whether there are any human beings, and hence whether any human beings act rightly or wrongly, it is not up to God to decide what is good or bad, or right or wrong, for creatures with the nature that is essential to human beings. 
- God made these principles more conspicuous to us, by giving the laws (leges) he has given for the guidance of people who are less capable of reasoning.
- He seems to agree with Suarez in recognizing duties (debita) that are independent of any divine command. Law (lex) introduces new duties (debita), but Grotius does not suggest that there are no duties prior to law.
- With Aquinas and Suarez, he infers that the natural law is immutable, and cannot be changed by God without self-contradiction.
- Grotius agrees with Aquinas and Suarez that if God commands us to kill someone or take their goods, God does not make murder (homicidium) or theft lawful in this instance, but changes the circumstances so that the action of killing or taking is no longer murder or theft
- Grotius answers Carneades by denying that a society’s view of its advantage is the only basis for right. In his view, there is a natural basis of right. It is founded on human nature, and especially on the human desire for society.
- He ascribes to human nature both this social aim and the capacity to plan for present and future; in the light of this aim and this capacity we find principles that belong to natural right.
- Though Grotius agrees with him on some points, he does not follow Suarez in allowing a right of resistance.²⁹ In his long chapter ‘On the war of subjects against superiors’ (i 4), Grotius further limits even the limited permission that Suarez gives for rebellion: Grotius speaks as though we should regard principles as rules that give the right answer in most cases, and we should assume that if they do this, it is better to observe them even when they give the wrong answer than to modify the rule. Grotius allows only self-defence. He does not allow the form of aggressive war that Suarez allows, when the commonwealth deposes the ruler. He rejects the arguments of contemporaries who allow this power of deposition to inferior officials speaking on behalf of the commonwealth (i 4.6.1). In his view, they have only the status of private persons in relation to the supreme ruler whom they claim the right to depose. 
- He does not introduce a jural conception of morality, but rejects a jural conception in favour of Scholastic naturalism.
- Grotius shares some of Hobbes’s fears about the effects of philosophical arguments for disobedience, and so he tries to blunt the critical edge of some Scholastic theories.¹⁰
- Grotius accepts the naturalist side of Suarez’s position: According to Suarez’s ‘intermediate’ position (as Suarez describes it), some aspects of natural law are independent of the divine legislative will and some depend on it. Natural law is law, and imposes an obligation, insofar as it depends on the divine will, whereas the rightness and wrongness of the acts that it prescribes and prohibits are features of the nature of things in themselves, apart from the divine will. Emphasis on one side or another of Suarez’s position results in a more strongly voluntarist or naturalist account. It is difficult to say whether Grotius goes further than Suarez in maintaining that obligation and law, as well as rightness, belong to the nature of things apart from the divine will.
- To a limited extent, Hobbes believes in intrinsic moral properties, since he believes that the moral virtues are simply those states that promote self-preservation as means to peaceful and commodious living. But he does not believe that rightness (honestas) consists in anything beyond advantage (commodum); on this point Suarez, Grotius, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all disagree with him.
- Aristotle, the Stoics, the Scholastics, and Grotius: According to these defenders of natural sociality, facts about human nature itself, and not simply about competition, aggression, and self-preservation (as in Hobbes), make political life appropriate for human beings.
- Suarez and Grotius, however, believe that (3) natural properties include irreducible moral properties, and so they believe that (4) the content of morality goes beyond the advantageous.³¹ 
- Aquinas and Suarez find the basis for moral rightness and justice in this common good, determined by the nature of human beings as rational and social animals. This aspect of human nature makes it appropriate to form communities in which individuals regard one another as proper objects of concern for their own sake, and not simply as means to one’s own self-confnied ends.³³ According to this naturalist view, the recognition of these facts about human beings gives us sufficient reason to pursue the honestum as part of our own good, and hence to accept morality. If these claims about nature and rational agency are correct, neither the advantageous nor the honestum depends on divine commands. Grotius accepts this naturalist view. He combines the Aristotelian appeal to the social nature of human beings with Stoic claims about conciliation (oikeioˆsis), and forms his own view of natural human sociality.³⁴ He agrees that acceptance of human sociality is a sufficient basis for the acceptance of natural rightness.
- Grotius’ attitude to this appeal to nature is cautious. He uses it, as Suarez does, to argue against the view that there is no place for considerations of right and justice in the state of nature, and especially in relations between states ( JBP, Prol. 25). To this extent, he agrees with Suarez against Machiavelli. But he rejects Suarez’s use of the argument from nature to support rebellion.⁶⁷ He recognizes the right to refuse to obey orders to act unjustly, but denies any right to depose a ruler who rules badly. He limits the right of rebellion (i 4.8), though he allows it in extreme circumstances








#                  Difficulties

- It might be wisest to attribute to him no clear view on whether the natural law is prescribed, as such, by God’s legislative will or not.
- the Scholastic and naturalist foundations of Grotius' moral theory of natural right tend to undermine his political claims about unrestricted obedience to a state.