- Holistic Naturalism (Human nature os a system of some tendencies of people. But not all tendencies are part of human nature) is false. Hobbes does not believe that all claims about human nature must be excluded from moral philosophy, but he rejects the naturalist position that we have outlined. Everything what people do is a human's nature
- Virtues of character are sufficient to be virtuous
- Psychological egoism is true
- In his view, the difference between simply entertaining a proposition and believing it consists in the degree of vividness with which you entertain it; it is an introspectible property of the idea itself.
- Eudamonism is false
- Defends both compatibilism and anti-intellectualism against Bramhall. 
- freedom consists simply in internal determination; he sees no relevant distinction between the will and the ‘sentiments’ or ‘passions’ as sources of the internal determination.
He rejects both an indeterminist and an intellectualist account of freedom.¹⁸ Though he accepts the voluntarist criticisms of intellectualism far enough to believe that determination by intellect is not freedom, he does not regard voluntarism as an adequate alternative. Against both intellectualists and voluntarists, he concludes that the will is a passion. 
- Ordinary legislators support their commands with sanctions. If God does this too, God can attach pleasure to the fulfilment of divine commands and pain to the violation of them. Since we naturally aim at pleasure and avoid pain, God can change the natural law without changing this aspect of our nature. If, then, we want to maintain the penal account of natural law, we are well advised to accept a hedonist account of the good. Hence Hobbes combines a penal account of natural law with hedonism. In his view, the laws of nature, apart from divine commands, are not really laws, but counsels of prudence prescribing means to our pleasure. As divine commands they are laws combined with sanctions appealing to pain and pleasure. The appropriate connexion with human nature relies on a hedonist conception of the good.⁷ 
- Morality works only in a background of peace
- Human nature is not fulfilled by morality
- Morality must be imposed on people to restrain their self-seeking tendencies
- God commands to do what government says
- According to Hobbes, the content of natural law, independent of divine or human legislation, consists of the demands of self-interest
- The Aristotelian dialectical approach to moral inquiry begins from ‘appearances’ and does not confnie itself to evident and indisputable starting points. Hobbes believes that it leads to insoluble and fruitless disputes. 
- He does not believe that this difference between the progress of natural philosophy and the relative backwardness of moral philosophy marks a difference in the subject matter or in the appropriate method. Nor does he draw the sceptical conclusion³ that knowledge of moral questions cannot be found, or the nihilist conclusion that there is no moral reality to be known. He believes that disputes result simply from failure to apply the method of natural philosophy.⁴ We should begin with clear and indisputable axioms about human nature, and avoid the dialectical method that relies on common beliefs.⁵
- He believes that his answers will fall outside the range of answers that have been subjects of controversy in moral philosophy.
- His main objection to his predecessors is not that they disagree with one another, but that their doctrines are dangerous: Mistaken theories of Greek and Latin writers have encouraged citizens to believe that they have rights against their rulers. Citizens claim the right to judge their rulers by standards derived from moral principles, and so they try to replace their rulers by agitation or revolution.
- Hobbes does not share Grotius’ view that the Scholastic doctrines can be largely maintained without endangering civil peace
- Hobbes argues, therefore, that peace is absolutely prior to all other moral considerations; they all presuppose the maintenance of peace, and therefore cannot justify disturbances of the peace.
- He does not, for instance, try to defend the priority of peace by a dialectical argument to show that, on reflexion, we really believe peace matters more than anything else. He does not suggest that if we reach ‘narrow reflective equilibrium’ among our moral and political views, we will accept the supremacy of peace.
- Will is simply the last ‘appetite’ (i.e., desire, appetitus) in deliberation. His account of deliberation assumes that desire is simply anticipatory pleasure or pain, which is the internal movement explaining action (EL 7.1–2). We move towards ends (7.4) that differ in their closeness or distance. We deliberate by being struck in succession by different attractive features of a situation. The strongest appetite that emerges from that process immediately precedes action; this is the will.
- The will is not an intrinsically rational desire aiming at the good rather than the pleasant. Our goal-directed movements, therefore, do not rely on a rational appearance of an overall good (EL 7.5).
- Hobbes believes that non-rational agents also deliberate, so that if will is desire resting on deliberation, it is not confined to rational agents. Non-rational agents also deliberate. They hesitate at the idea of something repellent and advance at the idea of something attractive; hence they deliberate, and act on their wills.  Hence the Scholastic distinction between will and passion is misguided.
- Hobbes does not claim to reject deliberation: This account of deliberation refers only to non-normative states; it does not mention our estimate of the value of the different options that occur to us in deliberation. It does not distinguish our being more attracted to one of two options from our believing that it deserves to be preferred. If we believe (as we suppose) that one option deserves to be preferred, we believe that the reasons for it are better than the reasons for the other option. This aspect of deliberation and will has no place in Hobbes’s account; he does not suggest that our will results from the judgment that one option is better than the other, or from the judgment that we have stronger reasons for pursuing it. Deliberation and will, in his account, result from yielding successively to a sequence of appearances about different options, without any rational assessment of their value.²
- Hobbes' analysis of deliberation implies that the Scholastics are wrong to treat will as a distinctively rational appetite.
- His account for deliberation leaves room for incontinence.
- Hobbes rejects Aquinas’ intellectualism - the view that the will is determined by the greater good presented by reason.
- Hobbes is a compatibilist - Against Bramhall's indeterminism, Hobbes defends the compatibilist view that we have attributed to Aquinas, and goes further by accepting soft determinism.
- Hobbes rejects rationalism
- Hobbes rejects indeterminism
- Since he believes in freedom, the relevant sort of freedom is internal determination by desire. If H-deliberation is not deliberation, his inferences about freedom are insecure.
- Deliberation = succession of advances and retreats consisting in desires and aversions.
- Desire = advance towards anticipated pleasure. So, he maintains psychological hedonist egoism as a theory of motives
- The objects of our passions are means to our satisfaction or security
- If I pity someone quite unrelated to me who will not affect my security, I do not believe that this person or what is happening to him actually affects my security. In this case Hobbes believes that I think of what I would feel if my security, for instance, were threatened. In thinking of the counterfactual situation, I actually have some of the feeling that I would have if the situation were actual, and so I have the feeling even when my security is not involved.
- He believes that the non-egoistic passions (if there are any) motivate us only if they seem to affect our prospects of pleasure and pain
- Hobbes argues that satisfaction or contentment (Epicurean static pleasures), taken as an ultimate end of desire, does not explain why we go on desiring and acting and would not regard the cessation of desire as a welcome outcome (L. 11.1). Hence, we ought not to identify pleasure with Epicurean satisfaction or contentment; we ought to identify it with Epicurean ‘kinetic’ pleasure. We seek means to ‘secure the way of our future desire’. But securing the way of our future desire cannot be our ultimate end; for we do not want to secure the way of our future desire for its own sake.
- There is 3 types of good:
    - beautiful - good in the promise
    - delightful - good as the end desired, good in effect
    - profitable - good as a means
- There is no such good as honestum (other-regarded good)
- If Hobbes is right about the connexion between judgments of goodness and apparent pleasure, judgments about goodness vary not only among different people, but also within a single person at different times.
- practical reason do not find constitutions of the ultimate good and means to it. It simply discovers means to our future-directed desires for pleasure.
- All motives either express a passion or result from deliberation about the means to satisfy a passion.
- A preference for some present good over a greater long-term good is irrational, in Hobbes’s view; it is rational to focus on the long-term rather than the short-term good.
- Reason, therefore, directs us towards the pursuit of our long-term good, which Hobbes identifeis with self-preservation.
- Peace is good only because of people desires. In the state of discord that (according to Hobbes) results from disagreement, everyone’s desires coincide, because everyone sees that strife frustrates their attempts to secure the way of their future desire.
- Peace is a means to satisfying their desires.
- We might reject his simplifying reduction of good to pleasure, on the ground that we make objective judgments about goodness; and do we not need objective judgments in order to fnid a rational moral basis for political society? Hobbes answers that we do not need the sort of objectivity that he denies about goodness. On the contrary, once we recognize the consequences of his subjectivist view, we can see an acceptable substitute for objectivity. The subjectivity of value judgments, given the actual differences between human beings, leads to discord; but discord, given the similarities between human beings, leads to the unanimous desire for peace.
- If we have an overriding desire for self-preservation, we discover the means to it only by reasoning about future goods. If we do not consider the long-term consequences of our action, we frustrate our desire for self-preservation. In the same way we may expect reason to regulate hope and fear; for baseless fear is based on a false supposition about the future, and reason is needed to fnid true or plausible beliefs that guide our fears. Someone who acts on a fear resulting from groundless beliefs about the future acts ‘against reason’ by acting contrary to beliefs about what promotes the satisfaction of the overriding desire for self-preservation, or by failing to consider what promotes the satisfaction of this overriding desire.
- When reason declares peas as something good, this declaration is not categorical, in Kant’s sense, by being independent of human inclinations; it is a hypothetical imperative that applies to actual situations.
- He appeals to pleasure, as the Cyrenaics do, as an alternative to the eudaemonist’s ultimate good. In his view, everything I choose for its own sake is some pleasure of my own, and so must be some self-confnied condition; it must be a state of myself that does not include (though it may causally depend on) a state of someone or something else.
- There is no final good. Moreover, if it would, it will be unsatisfactory, because then we will stop acting.
- Hobbes agrees with Boyle in rejecting agents distinct from God that have their own inherent goal-directed natures. 
- He treats the study of human action as part of the study of ‘motion’. Deliberation and desire should be understood, in his view, as the result of the interplay between motions of varying strengths that determine the motion of the human being as a whole. He regards desire as genuine motion, and attacks those who treat it as merely metaphorical motion 
- Hobbes, then, follows Aristotle in arguing for a conception of the human good from claims about human nature.⁶⁶ He disagrees with Aristotle on the conclusions that can be drawn about the human good from an appeal to human nature. In particular he denies that we can discover anything like an Aristotelian ultimate end. 
- He denies that a human being is naturally social
- He does not believe that the human good consists in a life that realizes human capacities under the control of practical reason. The examination of human capacities and their relations does not help us to discover the virtues. Nor does he claim that the good for a human being essentially includes the good of others, because he cannot rely on the argument about self-realization that leads Aristotle to this conclusion.
- He agrees with Aquinas’ claim that we grasp the principles of natural law by grasping the end to which human nature is naturally inclined. Insofar as he derives an account of the virtues from an account of human nature Hobbes agrees with Aquinas. Hence he identifeis moral philosophy with the science of the laws of nature. The true doctrine of the laws of nature specifies the virtues and vices that are the subject matter of moral philosophy.
- Hobbes believes that natural law rests on the requirements of human nature. On this point he agrees with Aquinas and his successors. But he departs from Aquinas in claiming this law simply prescribes means to self-preservation.
- Everyone till Hobbes (in his opinion) were roughly right about which traits are virtues, but they were wrong about what makes them virtues, not seeing their essential connexion with ‘peaceable, sociable, and comfortable living’.
- Hobbes denies that when we study human nature we discover that human beings have a natural ultimate good that supports an account of the virtues. If he is right, we cannot discover from the examination of human nature and the human good that we have good reason to follow the principles of natural law. It is wrong to believe that some actions are intrinsically right (honesta) by being appropriate for rational nature.
- In Hobbes’s view, human nature is a collection of desires without a system; practical reason, therefore, must simply look for the means to satisfy one’s predominant desire. If our predominant desire is to secure the way of our future desire, we care most about our self-preservation. Practical reason justifeis the laws of nature if it shows that they specify means to self-preservation. This is what Hobbes tries to show about the laws of nature.
- He believes that natural laws impose obligations. He defines obligation by comparing it to rights:
    - Right (liberty) - being free to do something
    - Law (obligation) - being not free to do sometnihg
    - Hobbes does not believe (or at least does not always believe) that our natural right extends to everything that is physically possible in the state of nature. Some remarks (outside Leviathan) about violations of the law of nature in war suggest ways of exceeding our natural rights.
- Physical renunciation of a right is not the same as obligation. In his view, I lay aside my right by renunciation or by transfer, not by actually standing out of your way, but by saying I will stand out of your way.²³ Once I have done this, I am obliged to stand out of your way and I ought to stand out of your way; if I do not stand out of your way, I act without right.
- It is not clear, however, that Hobbes takes the making of a promise all by itself to constitute an obligation. This claim has to be restricted to cases where the promise is not ‘invalid’. The obligation involved here is also prudential, provided that we think in the indirect prudential way that we must adopt in order to explain why the laws of nature are obligatory in foro externo in a commonwealth
- His other remarks do not suggest that it is quite so easy to oblige myself. I oblige myself to you through a valid covenant of mutual trust, involving the future performance by both parties. Such a covenant requires some assurance that the other party will also keep the covenant (L. 15.3). We can acquire this assurance more easily by recognizing that once A has performed A’s part of the covenant, it is reasonable for B to perform B’s part (L. 15.5).²⁶ When both A and B have the appropriate assurance, each obliges himself by signifying his intention to lay aside his right.
- Hobbes throws some light on his view of obligation by connecting it with motivation. In non-physical obligation ‘liberty is taken away . . . by hope or fear’, rather than by physical restraint.³⁰ When we recognize that something promotes our self-preservation, we have (according to Hobbes’s account of motivation) a predominant desire for it, and in that respect our recognition of the effects of the action takes away our liberty not to perform the action and ‘binds’ us to perform the action. We act freely in choosing the action, in the sense of ‘free’ that Hobbes applies to actions, because our desires cause our action; but since our desires necessitate our action, they take away (in one respect) our liberty not to act.
- Hobbes does not think that the agreement creates the obligation, so that I am obliged to keep my promise in virtue of having made the promise to you and your having accepted it.
- He believes that we are obliged only when our acts of agreement are made in circumstances that offer us sufficient benefits and assure us of mutual compliance. When these conditions hold, we have a predominant desire to keep the agreement; this predominant desire is the motive that is the obligation.
- The agreement does not create the obligation; words or other signs are means, but not the source, of obligation. The words contribute to our being obliged only insofar as we have sufficient motives for doing what we say we will do.
- Observance of Laws of Nature (in foro interno or externo, as appropriate to the situation) promotes our interest and os, in this sense, they also oblige us by creating overriding motive. This obligation removes our freedom to violate them once we realize what they say. They oblige us only if we recognize that they are counsels of self-preservation. If we do not know this about the laws of nature, their mere existence does not restrict our freedom. Only ignorance of the content and implications of the laws of nature can explain their violation.
- The laws of nature and the virtues connected with them are eternal; they oblige, and are laws, in the court of conscience. The fulfliment of the natural law is ‘all we are obliged to by rational nature’ (Civ. 3.30). This is why the sovereign is subject to the laws of nature, though not to the civil law.
- According to Hobbes’s moral psychology, all predominant motives necessitate; hence we are obliged insofar as we have a predominant motive necessitating our action. In this sense the laws of nature oblige us.
- Non-physical obligation is different since it does not require any specific act of agreement between two parties. It is not so clear, however, whether it violates the principle that all obligation arises from one’s voluntary action. The laws of nature do not oblige any agents who do not seek to preserve themselves and to secure the way of their future desire; for they do not tell us to preserve ourselves, but only what we need to do if we want to preserve ourselves. Perhaps, then, the voluntary action that is presupposed is our self-preserving endeavour; this is not an act of agreement or consent that underlies the obligation (as in covenants), but it is still a voluntary action. 
- Hobbes holds a unified conception of non-physical obligation as the removal of liberty through voluntary action that results in a predominant motive. Within this conception, he can explain why the laws of nature prescribe and create obligations, by being empirical propositions about means to self-preservation.
- Hobbes agrees with some of Suarez’s claims about intrinsic morality: The laws of nature are precepts of reason in their own right, apart from divine commands, and so we ought to observe them. Hobbes takes a more naturalistic position than Suarez accepts, since he agrees with Vasquez’s view that the laws of nature create obligations apart from divine commands; this view follows from Hobbes’s motivational account of obligation together with his account of human motivation. Hobbes finds obligation without legislation (whereas Suarez not). Hobbes’s claim that the laws of nature oblige (L. 15.3, 36; Civ. 3.26, 27, 29) precedes his claims (in Civ. 4) about their divine origin and the obligation resulting from it. The obligation to keep the laws of nature does not require them to be laws commanded by God.
- God obliges us because he can punish us.
- Since obligation is imposition of necessity, and since the relevant type of necessity is psychological necessity, we are obliged wherever we have compelling motives, whether or not they result from commands. This is why the laws of nature oblige us, whether or not they are genuine laws. Whether or not God exists or commands them, they are counsels of self-preservation, but they are laws insofar as they are commanded by God
- Our obligation consists in our overriding desire to obey natural laws as means to selfpreservation, both because of their intrinsic character (apart from divine commands) and because we fear punishment, since God, even more than the sovereign, can enforce his will by force. A commander is necessary to turn the laws of nature into genuine laws, and their status as genuine laws provides us with a further source of obligation. It does not, however, provide us with a different kind of obligation; in both cases our obligation consists in the prospective benefits of following the laws of nature and the consequent desire to follow them.
- God is not bound to command one thing rather than another, but simply exercises power in commanding what God wills. So, we have no reason to infer that God commands an action only if that action seems to us to promote self-preservation; the character of the natural law shows nothing about necessary features of God’s will. In this respect, then, Hobbes is a voluntarist about the divine will and the content of morality. He implies that it is logically possible for God to command us to violate the counsels of self-preservation that we have overriding reason to pursue (apart from any beliefs about divine commands). On this point, he agrees with Ockham’s views about divine power and morality. 
- Hobbes does not allow any irreducible normative necessity; the necessity imposed by obligation is psychological. In Suarez’s view, God’s communicating a command to me is sufficient to oblige me to obey it, whether or not I want to obey it. According to Hobbes, however, it is not sufficient; my motivation is also necessary. Natural law is prescribed by correct reason only insofar as we have an overriding motive to obey it; and we have such a motive only towards counsels of self-preservation.
- God has a right to command this observance; and if we apply Hobbes’s account of a right to this claim about God’s right, we must take Hobbes to mean that God is free, since nothing prevents him, to command obedience and to enforce compliance with his command.
- Virtues are not needed by themselveds. We cannot find a reason if we simply consider human nature as shaped by the virtues; we must also consider it in the specific circumstances where we find a predominant desire to practise the virtues.
- Hobbes sees that the traditional virtues do not always promote self-preservation. He does not conclude that he is wrong to defend them by appeal to self-preservation, or that the laws of nature are not counsels of self-preservation; instead he concludes that we have no reason to practise the traditional virtues when they do not promote self-preservation.
- He does not give a deontological ground for our obligation to obey divine commands. Nor does he assess moral rules deontologically. He assesses them with reference to the public interest, and this assessment depends on a rule-utilitarian explanation.
- While it is helpful and appropriate to say that he tries to ‘vindicate’ and to ‘justify’ morality, and to show that we have ‘reason’ to follow it, it is also misleading; Hobbes has no room for these normative claims, except insofar as they can be reduced to claims about motivation. A justification of morality and a demonstration that we have reason to follow morality is simply a true prediction that in the specified circumstances we will have an overriding motive to follow it.
- He connects morality with self-preservation because he takes the desire for self-preservation to be our overriding motive; hence, his argument for reducing morality to self-preservation depends on his reduction of the normative to the psychological. If we reject the latter reduction, we have good reason to question his defence of morality. 
- Hobbes is not the first philosopher to appeal to a state of nature as a starting-point for understanding the basis of moral principles and political obligation. The 16th-century Scholastics and 17th-century natural law theorists also rely on a state of nature. 
- Why is the state of nature a condition of perpetual conflict? Hobbes’s most general argument rests on one aspect of his views about the subjectivity of goodness.⁶⁰ Since I use ‘good’ for what pleases me (oysters), and you use ‘good’ for what pleases you (cheese), we differ in our judgments about what things are good. Hence our judgments about goodness display ‘discord and strife’. Hobbes argues that this discord in judgments explains the discord that marks the state of nature. 
- Hobbes deals with the objection that helpung others is not advantageous in three stages: (1) It is sometimes correct. The state of nature sums up the circumstances in which we have no reason to practise the moral virtues. (2) However, we are worse off in these circumstances than if we are members of a commonwealth. Hence we ought to become members of a commonwealth and to follow the rules for the construction and the preservation of a commonwealth. The relevant rules are counsels for the preservation of peace, which are embodied in the moral virtues. (3) If we are members of a commonwealth, our self-preservation requires us to do whatever preserves peace, and hence requires us to practise the moral virtues
- Our desiders for competition may be either:
    - Part of our nature
    - Contingent in so far as there are not anough resources.
- If our desires are only contingently competitive, it may be more difficult for Hobbes to prove that the state of nature is so insecure that we need to create a commonwealth with unrestricted power to coerce. He may remove this difficulty if he is allowed to assume essentially competitive desires as part of human nature. But that assumption may make it more diffciult to explain the stability of a commonwealth of Hobbesian agents. A commonwealth may remove some confilcts, by assuring each of us of protection for our unshareable resources; but it does not prevent confilcts that arise from essentially competitive desires.
- When you asks 'Why should I pay my debts in the peace state? If I will cheat it will not destroy peace' you are in Hobbes' hands. You can't be sure that all other people do not think same as you do. So, it is why you need to do right actions
- Hobbes offers two different sorts of arguments for the state. It is plausible to claim that Hobbes offers both sorts of arguments; for he wants to explain both how the state is possible and what makes it morally legitimate. But it is also misleading to distinguish two sorts of argument; for in his view, they are not really distinct. He speaks of the laws of nature as precepts of reason, and says that reason helps us out of the state of nature; but he also believes that this role for reason depends on the appropriate sorts of passions. His account of morality and obligation implies that recognition of reasons demonstrating the goodness of something is simply a dominant motive to pursue it. Hence we recognize that peace is good just insofar as we have a dominant desire for it. So, 2 arguments are:
    - The first argument asserts that there are moral reasons for establishing the state and that the social contract gives it moral legitimacy. Hence the argument from the goodness of peace and the rationality of pursuing it might be taken to show that the state is morally required. 
    - The second argument simply identifies the motives that underlie the foundation of a state, implying that fear of other people is the psychological basis for obedience to law and governments. According to this argument, the social contract establishes only the psychological possibility of the state, saying nothing about whether the state is morally legitimate.
- If we cannot secure an agreement that leads to peace, we are allowed to violate the laws of nature.
- The making of an agreement cannot by itself generate the sort of community that removes conflict. As a Hobbesian agent, I have a good reason to agree to end the state of war, if other people will comply with the agreement. But I also have a good reason to gain as much as I can from my imperfect compliance with the agreement. For the very best outcome for me would be the one in which other people avoid aggression against me, but I am free to commit aggression on them when it suits me; hence I have a reason for violating the agreement when I can get away with it.
- Because of our nature, we need some corcive power that would punish violation of rules so much so it will be no longer attractive. Coercion alters the options in two related ways: 
    - The commonwealth compels me to comply, and punishes me for non-compliance, in cases where it would appear benefciial for me to cheat if I were not going to be punished. Since I now face a threat of punishment, it no longer appears to be in my interest to do what would otherwise appear to be in my interest. 
    - I will now be assured that potential violators will be deterred from violation, and so I will be confident about making and keeping agreements. I need no longer refuse to make the agreement out of fear that others will not comply. Moreover, they can reach the same estimate about my behaviour. 
- In Hobbes’s view, Laws of Nature are laws precepts of reason, because they concern a future good, which is the concern of reason; in violating the principles that secure this future good, we act on ‘irrational appetite’
- Hobbes’s appeal to these virtues implies that we preserve the commonwealth better if we follow rules that do not aim directly at its preservation. He offers an indirect consequentialist defence of morality. It is indirect because it gives us reasons to follow a specific rule on a particular occasion without attention, on that occasion, to the consequences of our action or of the observance of the rule. So, we must preserver the commonwealth, even if it does not preserve our life (though preserving of our lifes is our final good)
- Hobbes is in a weak position, since he takes the laws of nature to aim not at the public good, but simply at the preservation of the state.
- ‘fanatical’ desires are needed to set up the commonwealth.
- The ninth law of nature requires every man to acknowledge every other man as his equal. The tenth law, relying on this acknowledgment, asserts that people have equal rights on entry into the state. Hobbes interprets the commandments of Jesus as requiring that a man ‘should esteem his neighbour worthy all rights and privileges that himself enjoyeth; and attribute unto him whatsoever he looketh should be attributed unto himself: which is no more, but that he should be humble, meek, and contented with equality.’
- Actually, slavery is OK, because if someone has defeated you, you have a right to fight back. If you decide to be a slave - it is your free choice, so, it is not slave but something different.
- Similarly, the reply to the fool is more plausible if Hobbes’s assumptions about risk are not empirical, but procedural assumptions that defnie the considerations that a moral argument should take into account. If the fool ought to assume that others are his equals in astuteness, he ought not to act on the assumption that he can deceive them. Similarly, if he ought to be extremely averse to the dangers of being found out, he ought not to act on ordinary calculations about the probability of being found out. His attitude, on this view, does not necessarily rest on false empirical assumptions, but it violates the procedures that defnie the moral point of view. These procedural attitudes to equality and to probability are summed up in Hobbes’s treatment of the Golden Rule.²⁶ He suggests that if we observe it, we can save ourselves the trouble of working out the long-term benefits of observing each law of nature on each occasion. I ought (rationally) to assume it is probable that other people will treat me in the way I treat them, and so I ought (rationally) to treat them in the way I would want them to treat me; if I do this, I will be following the laws of nature. I follow a pattern of equal treatment between others and between others and myself. I rely on an assumption of reciprocity that has not been shown to be probable. The thought that other people might not be as malevolent or exploitative or clever as I am may suggest to me that I do not need to worry about retaliation for bad treatment. But Hobbes insists that I ought to exclude any such thought from my moral calculation, since it would allow me to give an unfair advantage to myself.
- knowledge of human nature does not show that morality is a non-instrumental element in the human good.²⁸ A correct account of human nature shows, in Hobbes’s view, that no correct conception of the human good supports claims about the first principles of natural law. To this extent, he is a radical sceptic about morality. He believes, however, that, given the actual circumstances that face human beings, he can avoid general scepticism about morality. His analysis of the content of morality implies that it aims at the public good; hence, if we find a reason, from an egoistic hedonist point of view, to pursue the public good, we find a reason to observe moral rules.
- Hobbes sometimes suggests that reason may be the source of violations of the laws of nature, and so it needs coercion to change the rational attractiveness of the different options.
- According to Hobbes, peace is a non-competitive instrumental good; we all benefit from it in pursuing our various sources of pleasure and satisfaction, but our ends are not essentially non-competitive. 
- Since Hobbes believes we have a good reason to obey the natural law even if we leave God aside, and he believes that the only good reasons are those that appeal to self-interested motives, he argues that it is in my interest to observe the laws of nature. Hence he treats the laws of nature as indirect counsels of self-preservation, because they preserve the commonwealth. 
- The only natural goods are the pleasant (iucundum) and the advantageous (utile)
- For Hobbes, the question about why we ought to obey God is easily answered.
He derives the obligation (and hence motivation) to obey God from God’s overwhelming power; he recognizes no distinction, for moral purposes, between power and authority (or legitimacy)
- he accepts a voluntarist account of the relation between divine commands and morality. 
- Such a reply to Cudworth fits Hobbes’s general view that to be obliged is to have a desire strong enough to move us to do the action we are obliged to do. This is why Hobbes believes that the winning side in a war imposes valid obligations on the losing side, insofar as it has the superior power. We have no obligations to obey anyone’s commands in the state of nature; for, since no one has the power to compel us, no one can produce in us a strong enough desire to obey the command. 
- to be obliged is to have a desire strong enough to move us to do the action we are obliged to do. This is why Hobbes believes that the winning side in a war imposes valid obligations on the losing side, insofar as it has the superior power. We have no obligations to obey anyone’s commands in the state of nature; for, since no one has the power to compel us, no one can produce in us a strong enough desire to obey the command. 
- This reply to Cudworth’s objections requires us to choose between different interpretations of Hobbes’s general aim of reducing normative concepts and properties to psychological ones. He claims that a statement about an obligation is simply a statement about what we are motivated to do in the circumstances. Such a reduction might include three different claims: 
    - He provides an analysis of the relevant moral concepts (what does it mean to be right or worng), claiming that his psychological concepts are the same concepts. 
    - He provides an account of the relevant moral properties (which particual actions are right or wrong), claiming that they are identical to the psychological properties he describes. It seems that Hobbes means this.
    - He argues that there are no moral properties, and proposes that we speak of psychological properties instead. 
- Hobbes rejects both intellectualism and voluntarism in favour of his anti-rationalist account of the will. His revised moral psychology inclines him towards some voluntarist claims about the natural law; he does not believe that God recognizes any rational principles that are independently right, or that we can see to be right independently of God’s commanding them. We see reason to observe them because of God’s irresistible power and the sanctions that God imposes. But God’s actual commands are also rules of our self-preservation that we can see reasons to obey apart from the divine will. Hobbes’s position, therefore, contains elements of both naturalism and voluntarism. 
- Hobbes’s predominant view asserts that ends are set by desire apart from reason, and that the function of practical reason is to find instrumental means to the ends pursued by desire.³ 
- Hobbes assumes that the non-rational desire presupposed by practical reason is the desire for one’s own pleasure. Free and deliberate action consists simply in action aimed at one’s own pleasure, If, then, morality has any reasonable claim on an individual, it must also maximize one’s own pleasure. Moral properties, therefore, must be the sorts of properties that we will attend to when we become aware of them in relation to our desire for pleasure and the absence of pain. In Hobbes’s view, actions that promote our self-preservation meet this condition, since he assumes that we desire a greater long-term pleasure over a lesser one. 
- Locke accepts Hobbes’s hedonist starting-point. His anti-rationalism about motivation and action presumes a non-rational desire for an end, and he agrees with Hobbes in identifying this end with pleasure. Hobbes’s next step is to reduce moral principles to counsels of self-preservation. But Locke does not follow Hobbes on this point.
- Hobbes, who goes furthest in a voluntarist direction, believes that what fits human nature is independent of God’s legislative will; that is why the laws of nature are counsels of self-preservation. But Hobbes does not believe that God commands obedience to these natural laws because they preserve human society; the commands are not an exercise of God’s benevolence or of God’s care for creation, but of God’s power. 
- He abandon Culverwell’s unsatisfactory compromise that we cannot recognise intrinsic rightness without recognising a requirement (debitum). He prefers a more thoroughly voluntarist position that rejects intrinsic rightness. 
- Hobbes, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all reject intrinsic rightness.
- To a limited extent, Hobbes believes in intrinsic moral properties, since he believes that the moral virtues are simply those states that promote self-preservation as means to peaceful and commodious living. But he does not believe that rightness (honestas) consists in anything beyond advantage (commodum); on this point Suarez, Grotius, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all disagree with him. 
- The only source of reasons supporting practical principles—he ought to say—is desire for some end. If human beings in their natural state want self-preservation, they have reasons of advantage; but the reasons come from their desires, not from their nature, since they do not remain in the absence of the relevant desire. This is Hobbes’s position (or one of his positions) about reasons and natural goods. 
- Hobbes does not hold a pure natural law theory, since he also claims that the natural laws whose observance is commanded by God are counsels of prudence, and that this fact makes them moral rules. But his test for God’s being a legitimate ruler and legislator is simply divine power. 
- In Hobbes’s view, nothing about the divine will and morality makes it necessary for God to command the observance of the principles that preserve human society and individual human beings; that is why God’s commanding it is an exercise of divine power rather than divine benevolence.
- In taking sociality to be a central aspect of human nature, apart from any society, Pufendorf departs consciously from one of Hobbes’s basic assumptions. In Hobbes’s view, if we do not presuppose a government that secures peace for us, the rule of self-preservation has absolute priority, and no other aspect of human nature has any practical standing except insofar as it promotes self-preservation. Self-preservation is the ultimate and dominant end; in this respect, it corresponds to happiness, as Aristotle and Aquinas conceive it. Since Hobbes rejects the Aristotelian view that the ultimate end includes more than self-preservation, the other laws of nature oblige only in foro interno in the state of nature. 
- Clarke, can Hobbes speak of a ‘right of nature’, and hence recognize a morally justifeid liberty, without assuming that some moral principles apply to the state of nature? For if I have a moral right to do x, I am morally protected in doing x, and you would be wrong to prevent me from doing x.⁵⁰ How, then, can Hobbes claim that people have rights in the state of nature, while denying that there is anything that it is morally right or wrong to do? If Hobbes were clearly using ‘right’ so as to mean ‘moral right’, so that it implies some moral protection for some liberty, Clarke would be justified. But Clarke has imported moral content that Hobbes does not intend. For Hobbes identifies the right with a liberty, which is simply the absence of external impediments. His explicit use of ‘having a right’, therefore, does not imply that the liberty in question is morally justifiable. In his explicit sense of ‘right’, we have a right to preserve ourselves in the state of nature, if we are not overcome by superior individuals or groups. We have the right because we are free, and we are free simply insofar as we are not prevented. But this sort of right does not imply that other people are morally obliged to leave me alone, and Hobbes does not recognize any such obligation. 
- Hobbes is right to reject all these sources of obligation, if he shows that all obligation requires motivation, and that the only possible form of motivation rests on beliefs about self-preservation and the means to it. In that case, the obligation to join in making a compact must be an actual motive in each person in the state of nature; it must mean that each person has a strong enough desire in the state of nature to join in making the compact and to stick to it. If obligation results from practical reasoning, it emerges from instrumental reasoning about the means of satisfying one’s currently strongest desire. 
- Hobbes’s account of morality rests on his moral psychology, and in particular on his conception of practical reason. He denies that practical reason is the source of any distinctive ends; its only function is to fnid means to ends that are independently fxied by non-rational desires.⁴⁵
- Hobbes seems to accept both of positions below, without exploring either position. In both cases the indirect analysis avoids implausible claims about the explicit content of particular moral judgments, while maintaining the regulative role of the general egoist or utilitarian outlook.²⁸  
    - indirect utilitarianism
    - indirect egoism - An indirect egoist might answer that we do not think about our own advantage when we approve things morally, but nonetheless our unselfsih approval is justifeid and supported by consideration of our own advantage. Though Mandeville is wrong (on this view) to deny that we have unselfish motives, he would be right to affirm that our ultimate motives are selfish. If Hutcheson accepts indirect utilitarianism, should he not also accept this indirect egoist argument? If he should, his acceptance of indirect utilitarianism subverts his whole argument about the moral sense. 







#                  Difficulties

- He claims that deliberation results from the foresight of good or evil consequences, and better deliberation results from the foresight of more consequences.²⁴ He assumes that if we foresee more of the consequences, we take account of their goodness and badness in our deliberation and in any decision that is based on deliberation. But Even if we confine goods to pleasures, we have no reason to assume that in the H-deliberating agent the apparently larger sum of future pleasures always arouses the stronger appetite. We may, for instance, be irrationally indifferent to the remoter future, or irrationally obsessed by it at the expense of shorter-term beneftis, and these irrational tendencies may determine the course of H-deliberation. So, consideration of more consequences may not improve my deliberation
- His remarks about better and worse deliberation rely on a normative conception of deliberation, taking it to consider what is best overall and what we ought to do in the light of what seems best overall. H-deliberation has no room for this normative conception.
- Hobbes can't use Socrates' position from Protagoras, where Socrates claims that we always act to an apparent larger sum future pleasures, because it implies that there is no incontinence, but Hobbes itself claims that there is incontinence.
- He may support his claims about deliberation and overall good by the empirical assumption that we always pursue the greater apparent good; but this empirical assumption conflicts with the possibility of incontinence. 
- Hobbes argues for anti-rationalism (the will is determined by the strongest passion) against Aquinas’ conception of freewill on 2 arguments: 
    - Deliberation (as Hobbes, conceives it) is found in animals, and so belongs both to rational and to non-rational agency
    - Even in human beings deliberation is not necessary for voluntary action, since impulsive and rash actions are also voluntary. This one is easy to reject: for, Aquinas may said that we treat it as voluntary because we assume it is subject to deliberation on some occasions, even if not immediately before acting. Aquinas’ distinction between directly and indirectly voluntary actions helps to show that unpremeditated action is voluntary if is suitably connected to deliberation, even if deliberation has not immediately preceded.
- If the good is what pleases me, then means same as what pleases me pleases me.
- Exposure to reason always results in self-preserving action. ‘Irrational’ action is chosen with less than full awareness of the consequences. These assumptions about motivation, however, revive the difficulty that arises from Hobbes’s views about incontinence. For reason speaks in favour of peace only if our strongest desire is for self-preservation and the means to it. But if we desire something else more strongly than we desire the means to self-preservation, reason should tell us to do what satisfeis this other desire. Since Hobbes recognizes that we sometimes have other desires stronger than the desire for self-preservation, he should also agree that reason does not always declare that peace is good. His own views cast doubt on the empirical assumptions that support his claims about practical reason.
- His eliminative treatment of will and passion implies that he can endorse prudence as rational only because he makes an implausible assumption — implausible even within his own account of the passions — about motivation. His position would be more consistent if he were to deny that prudence itself is rational, and to argue that it is rational to follow the prudent course of action only if we have the relevant desire. He ought to agree that when our desires are relevantly different, prudence is not rational, since we will not adopt the prudent course of action when we are informed about the consequences of the choices open to us. Hobbes does not draw this conclusion from his account of practical reason.
- Hobbes does not distinguish process from activity, as Aristotle understands them.⁵⁷ Hobbes assumes that action, as opposed to passive enjoyment, is instrumental, aimed at the achieving of some end separate from it. Aristotle rejects this assumption, since he recognizes activities that are parts of happiness and to be chosen for their own sakes. If we achieve the ultimate end, we still have a motive for action; for we want to perform the activities that are characteristic of being happy. Aristotle’s conception seems ridiculous from Hobbes’s point of view only because Hobbes cannot see the point of Aristotle’s distinction between process and activity. He cannot see the point of it because it conflicts with Hobbes’s view that action is all purely instrumental.
- From an Aristotelian point of view, therefore, Hobbes is one of the people who argue too hastily from variation in evaluative judgments to metaphysical subjectivism (EN 1094b14–19). He does not show that observed variations in judgment require the subjectivist explanation. As Aristotle points out, if sick people value health more than habitually healthy people value it, that disagreement is easily explained by their different perspectives. Again, if some people prefer lobster and others prefer cheese, and we cannot show that one is really better than the other, that may be because they are equally good.
- For if I oblige myself by covenant to repay my debt to you, I do not abridge or ‘lay aside’ my physical freedom to refrain from paying my debt; on the contrary, if I did not keep that physical freedom, there would be no need for me to make a covenant.  For if I oblige myself by covenant to repay my debt to you, I do not abridge or ‘lay aside’ my physical freedom to refrain from paying my debt; on the contrary, if I did not keep that physical freedom, there would be no need for me to make a covenant.
- Moreover, if Hobbes’s claims about liberties and rights must be taken to refer to moral rather than physical liberty, he has not vindicated his claims about the right of nature. For the mere fact that nothing stops me from trying to preserve myself does not show that I am morally free to do whatever I think will preserve me. If Hobbes argues for the right of nature from the mere fact of physical freedom, he is wrong to say that the obligation incurred in making a promise is the laying aside of a right. If his position is consistent, his claim about the right of nature should assert my moral freedom in the state of nature. But then he needs some defence of the claim; the mere fact of physical freedom is not a sufficient defence.
- Sometimes Hobbes suggests that a voluntary act is necessary for all non-physical obligation (where physical obligation = something like being bounded). But how, we might ask, could this be true of the obligation arising from the laws of nature? And what does the obligation consist in? We have found that it is unhelpful to say simply that it is the renunciation of moral liberty, and then to say that moral liberty is simply the absence of obligation. 
- Although Hobbes agrees with Vasquez'es view that Natural Law exist without Divine Legislation, Hobbes sometimes agrees with Suarez’s account of a law, taking it to require the command of a legislator. Sometimes he says that Laws of Nature, without legislative will of God, would only advices about self-preservation, and would not carry the obligation that belongs to a law. What does Hobbes take to be added by a divine command? Suarez believes that a command is needed to create genuine law, and to create obligation, since obligation requires the imposition of necessity through a command. Hobbes agrees with him on the first point, since he claims that the laws of nature are not properly laws unless they are commands. But he does not seem to agree that commands are necessary for obligation. God’s commands take away freedom through hope of rewards and fear of punishments; this hope and fear is the source of the obligation. Once we recognize that there is a God and that he is the creator, and that he rewards and punishes for obedience and disobedience to the natural law, we are obliged to obey the natural law.⁴³ God’s commands are relevant because God supports them with sanctions. The command itself does not create the obligation, but the obligation consists in the motives that are excited by the sanctions.
- When Hobbes suggests that the subjectivity of goodness results in discord, he seems to confuse variation of taste, disagreement in judgment, and conflict in action. Perhaps he fails to distinguish (1) the ‘discord’ that consists in failure to agree in objective judgments about which things are good, from (2) the discord that consists in conflicting plans and actions. The first sort of discord is not the source of the most serious conflicts in the state of nature. 
- All these claims about the laws of nature presuppose that it is rational to do what must be done to preserve peace and to secure commodious living, in preference to acting on desires that threaten our prospect of peace. This presupposition would be correct if we always preferred peace and commodious living over any other end. In that case, the laws of nature would oblige us; our dominant desire for the end to which they secure the means would move us to observe them. But Hobbes is not justified in claiming that it is especially rational to desire peace, or to follow the laws of nature rather than principles that further our imprudent desires at times when they dominate us. Nor are we always obliged, even in foro interno, to follow the laws of nature. For, according to Hobbes’s conception of obligation as motivation, we are sometimes obliged to follow the laws of nature, but we are also sometimes obliged to follow principles that conflict with them; our obligations follow our dominant motives.
- These aspects of Hobbes’s position do not confilct with his claim that the laws of nature are precepts of reason. But they imply that violations of the laws of nature are also precepts of reason. For since precepts are rational insofar as they identify means to satisfy our desires, precepts that prescribe means to satisfy imprudent desires are no less rational than the laws of nature. It is rational to establish a commonwealth, when our prudent desires dominate, and rational to frustrate its establishment, when imprudent desires dominate: When we are prudent, we can take steps to frustrate our imprudent desires when they arise; hence, for instance, we pour the whisky down the sink if we believe we will want to drink too much of it. But equally we can take steps when we are imprudent to frustrate our prudent desires; if I am angry enough at you, I may insult you, even though I know I will want your help in the future and that the insult will turn you against me. Both attitudes to our future desires are equally rational, given the purely instrumental account of rationality.
- His account of the laws of nature and our obligation to seek peace seems to require the primacy of self-preservation. But that primacy both lacks support in Hobbes’s account of deliberation and confilcts with some of the mechanisms that are apparently needed to bring a commonwealth into existence. No easy modification allows Hobbes to defend all his main claims. 
- - If he claims that a refusal to adopt a maximin outlook in these circumstances is irrational, he relies on an irreducibly normative conception of rationality. But then he violates his aim of reducing reasons to motives. Hobbes succeeds in his aim of vindicating morality only ifhecanshowthat hisassumptions about aversion to risk are psychologically correct; they must be true descriptions of the outlook of agents in the situations he describes. But his argument fails this condition. He may still be right to claim that morality rests on assumptions about aversion to risk. If these assumptions cannot be justifeid on psychological grounds, they may be understood as aspects of the moral outlook; morality refuses to subject certain kinds of protection to gambling. Hobbes notices that these attitudes are characteristic of morality, but he cannot explain, within his psychological assumptions, why they are reasonable.⁶ He fails to include them within a vindicating reduction of morality; for Hobbesian psychology makes morality sometimes irrational. 
- Hobbesian basis of morality does not explain why we should not take unfair advantage. For he need to abandon the psychological assumptions that make it seem plausible to base morality on self-preservation in the first place; for an indirect argument assumes that we can act for reasons that do not seem to us to promote our own interest. If Hobbes were to admit that, he would be abandoning his reason for believing that the desire for self-preservation is the basis of the laws of nature.
- If moral rules must satisfy a demand for equality, we can see why not all possible rules for maintaining peace are principles of morality. Hobbes’s position on this point is not completely clear. He believes that peace is worth any price; if we can secure peace only by accepting someone’s offer to make us his servants on any condition he chooses, that is what we have to do. Hence we have no reasonable objection to tyranny. Hobbes does not regard this condition as slavery, since he believes slaves have given no promise to submit to their captors; but it need not differ from the condition of a slave in any other respect.
- If this is true, a tyrannical regime, violating the laws of nature but preserving the peace, seems to be the most probable alternative to the state of nature. It is difficult to agree with Hobbes’s assumption that facts about the state of nature justify his presumption of equality. The ninth and tenth laws of nature, therefore, do not seem necessary for the preservation of peace. Since these two laws of nature are plausible and important moral principles, Hobbes’s failure to explain them as means to the preservation of peace tends to undermine his attempted explanation of the traditional virtues. The unrealistic character of the presumption of equality—regarded from the point of view of Hobbes’s state of nature—raises a doubt about Hobbes’s account of morality.²² 
- Hobbes seems to assume equal astuteness and energy in different individuals; without such an assumption his arguments against the libertarian (maybe, weak state is a better one than a strong one, because it will allow strong individuals to violate the rules) and the nonconformist (for every individual it is better to violate rules, because it will allow them to live at the cost of the others) collapse.
- Hobbes speaks as though the presumption of equality rests simply on people’s presumed unwillingness to accept unequal treatment. Such a presumption is difficult to defend on empirical grounds, and that is the only defence he allows.
- His argument requires an account of practical reasoning that is alien to his explicit account. In defending morality, he assumes that in order to grasp the instrumental role of the laws of nature we must form a conception of our overall, long-term good and keep this steadily in mind. But we cannot form such a conception if we rely on Hobbesian deliberation. The function of Hobbesian deliberation is simply to discover the means to the satisfaction of our currently strongest desire; the results of this sort of deliberation do not match the results of deliberation about our long-term good. 
- When Hobbes sets out to explain why the traditional moral virtues are genuine virtues, he assumes that traditional views are right in supposing that we have good reason to acquire and to practise these virtues, so that the ‘fool’ and similar doubters are mistaken. In his view, reasons and obligations are reducible to motives. Hence he argues that we have good reason to practise the virtues by arguing that moral obligation is a form of prudential motivation (but he fails to show that)
- His reduciton of morality to psychological states fails. His attempted account of deliberation and practical reason is not even descriptively adequate; what he describes is not deliberation, but only the mental processes that are allowed within his psychological theory. Hobbes’s psychological theory is questionable; and if it were correct, it would undermine, rather than vindicate, morality.
- We can speak of necessitation when the first event is a sufficient condition for the second; hence necessitation follows from the truth of determinism. But necessitation does not imply the necessity of the second event unless the first event is itself necessary, and Hobbes does not make it clear why he thinks human actions that are necessitated are also necessary.
- Hobbes has simply pointed out that we have a sufficient motive for obeying a command if the commander has enough power. But we normally distinguish this case from the case where we think the commander has the authority to command. It is often reasonable to believe that A has the power, but lacks the authority, to compel B to comply, or that A has the authority and lacks the power. Since these two features of a commander are separable, authority cannot be the same as power.⁶⁰ Since Hobbes’s account of obligation cannot distinguish authority from power, it is mistaken. Hence we should identify the proper authority as the one whom it is right to obey; rightness does not consist simply in being commanded by a commander backed by a sanction. 
- Hobbes might be expected to reject this claim about the nature of authority. For, in his view, a civil authority is created by authorization. We authorize the sovereign by submitting our wills and judgments to his will and judgment.⁶¹ This requirement of authorization might be understood in two ways: (1) Authorization is simply permission and acquiescence; the only difference between authorized and unauthorized domination is the fact that the authorized ruler has been accepted. (2) Authorization is the product of a promise and so creates a moral reason for obedience independent of anyone’s power to compel obedience. Neither understanding of authorization suggests a good answer to Cudworth’s objections. (1) If the first is assumed, we can distinguish a case in which we acquiesce in someone’s domination from a case in which we believe someone is entitled to our obedience; only the second case implies a real moral obligation to obey him. (2) If the second understanding is assumed, Hobbes traces the obligation to obey back to the obligation to keep a promise, and so he still needs to explain that obligation. If he claims that it is a moral obligation independent of any commonwealth and independent of concern for my selfpreservation, he concedes Cudworth’s main point. If he claims that the obligation is simply the result of concern for my self-preservation, he faces the previous objection that actions motivated by this sort of concern are different from actions that involve respect for genuine authority. 
- If Hobbes were clearly using ‘right’ so as to mean ‘moral right’, so that it implies some moral protection for some liberty, Clarke would be justified. But Clarke has imported moral content that Hobbes does not intend. For Hobbes identifies the right with a liberty, which is simply the absence of external impediments. His explicit use of ‘having a right’, therefore, does not imply that the liberty in question is morally justifiable. In his explicit sense of ‘right’, we have a right to preserve ourselves in the state of nature, if we are not overcome by superior individuals or groups. We have the right because we are free, and we are free simply insofar as we are not prevented. But this sort of right does not imply that other people are morally obliged to leave me alone, and Hobbes does not recognize any such obligation. If Hobbes sticks to this non-normative conception of the right of nature, he must allow this right to extend beyond self-preservation. If our right to kill for self-preservation simply means that nothing prevents killing for self-preservation in the state of nature, it is equally true that there we have a natural right to kill and torture just for fun. Clarke points out that Hobbes is committed to this broad conception of the right of nature.⁵¹ But in fact Hobbes does not allow as broad a right of nature as he would have to allow if he stuck to a non-normative sense of ‘right’.⁵² In picking out the right of self-preservation and remaining silent about the other natural rights that follow from his non-normative sense of ‘right’, he seems to restrict the scope of rights in ways that his theory does not justify.⁵³ If he restricts our rights because he believes we have a morally justified or blameless liberty to pursue the means to our self-preservation, but no such liberty to behave with wanton cruelty, he recognizes moral constraints in the state of nature.⁵⁴ Hobbes might reply, however, that in speaking of rights, he is referring to what is allowed by right reason, but right reason is purely prudential, referring to the agent’s own interest. If the only rational considerations applying in the state of nature are prudential considerations, Clarke has not shown that moral considerations apply in the state of nature. Clarke is right, therefore, to criticize Hobbes’s appeal to the right of nature, but his criticisms do not force Hobbes to recognize morality in the state of nature. 
- But Clarke offers an objection that replies to this appeal to prudence. He argues that Hobbes cannot plausibly claim that the only rational constraint on behaviour in the state of nature is prudential. In Clarke’s view, we recognize moral obligations in the state of nature. We give them some weight, even if they do not guide our conduct in the same way as they would in a more stable situation.⁵⁵ Hobbes argues: (1) Some ordinary moral rules do not bind us when they impede selfpreservation. (2) Therefore, they are not binding in the state of nature, in which they impede self-preservation. (3) Therefore, the only rational principles binding us in the state of nature are principles of self-preservation. Clarke points out that Hobbes’s first claim does not justify the second or the third; it shows only that ordinary moral rules do not bind us in the state of nature on occasions when they impede self-preservation. But even in the state of nature, observance of ordinary moral rules does not always impede self-preservation; when it does not, we are obliged, for anything that Hobbes has shown, to observe them. Hobbes may acknowledge the considerations mentioned by Clarke, since he does not treat the right of nature as a right to do immoral actions that are not justifeid by appeal to self-preservation. Why should he refuse to allow that we have a natural right to amuse ourselves in every way, however immoral, that neither advances nor threatens our selfpreservation? He seems to agree, at least implicitly, with Clarke’s view that the obligation to observe moral rules is still in force whenever it does not impede self-preservation. Hobbes points out that we take some ordinary moral rules to be in abeyance in the state of nature because observance of them might threaten self-preservation. Clarke answers that the peculiar dangers of the state of nature modify our ordinary moral obligations, but do not cancel moral obligations that do not impede self-preservation. If moral considerations matter even in the state of nature, and even when they are not means to self-preservation, they are not simply rules derived from self-preservation.⁵⁶ If Hobbes were right, some actions would be morally indifferent that, in our ordinary view, are not indifferent. 
- Hobbes claims that self-preservation is the basis of all obligation in the state of nature. This is because he treats obligation as motivation, and takes the desire for self-preservation to be our strongest motive. Agents in the state of nature, however, do not seem to follow the demands of prudence, as Hobbes understands them. He describes deliberation as the result of anticipating various future pleasures and pains; the outcome of this process is motivation by the prospect of pleasure and pain that is psychologically most compelling. Hobbes does not justify his claim that the prospect of maximum long-term pleasure will always be most compelling; in fact such a claim conflicts with his belief in the possibility of incontinence. Hobbesian psychology has to make room for Hobbes’s apparent admission that people are sometimes moved by competitive motives even contrary to the demands of prudence and self-preservation. This admission gives us a further reason for doubting whether deliberation will reach the results that it has to reach if Hobbes is to treat claims about obligation as predictions about the results of deliberation. 
- Defenders of Hobbes might reject Hobbes’s reductive claim about normative statements in general, and might allow that prudential obligations are normative because they contain reasons that are not reducible to desires. Then they might tell Clarke that the principles that he interprets as moral principles are really prudential principles. Such a defence of Hobbes would not claim that statements about prudential obligation are really statements about motivation; but it would support Hobbes’s claim that in the state of nature, and therefore in the construction of the commonwealth, the only obligations are prudential. Would this be a good defence of Hobbes’s central claim? Such a defence has to explain why normative prudential principles are acceptable in the state of nature while normative moral principles are not. If we confine ourselves to the claim that self-preservation takes priority in the state of nature, Clarke has already answered us; for he has pointed out that morality makes room for self-preservation without losing its normative force. But if we go further, and claim that moral principles give good reasons only if they are derived from prudential principles, we must defend that claim. Hobbes defends it by arguing that prudential principles describe our actual overriding desires in the state of nature, whereas moral principles do not. But here he relies on his reduction of the normative to the psychological. 
- Hobbes fails to recognise explanatory (motivational) from normative (justificational) reasons.