- He is natural law moralist
- reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions 
- Morality depends on natural law, and hence on Divine commands, and that the natural foundation of morality consists in natural, but non-moral, goodness and badness. He allows natural ‘convenience’, but resolves it into pleasure and advantage without any natural rightness. 
- Voluntarist about relation between God and morality
- Dismisses Aristotelian metaphysics as hopelessly antiscientifci, primitive, and obscure.
- The only natural goods are the pleasant (iucundum) and the advantageous (utile)
- It is useful, though no doubt too simple, to understand both Locke’s moral psychology and his moral theory as an uneasy and unstable compromise between Hobbes and Cudworth. The main outlines of his views seem Hobbesian, but the qualifications that he introduces bring him closer to Cudworth, and therefore to the Scholastic position. The Hobbesian outlines are more influential; they explain Shaftesbury’s judgment that Locke struck ‘the home blow’ for Hobbesian principles.² But the qualifications show why one might not be content with the Hobbesian outlines. 
- He begins by claiming that recognition of the greater good does not move us to action.⁴ Here he rejects an extreme intellectualist view that the mere belief that x is better than y moves me to choose x over y. We might prefer the moderate intellectualist view that some desires moving us to action depend essentially on practical reason, and hence on beliefs about the good. According to this view (held by Aquinas), we would not be rational agents if we lacked these desires, constituting a will.⁵ Locke rejects this moderate intellectualist view as well. He does not merely insist that knowledge without desire is insufficient for action. He also holds an anti-rationalist conception of desire as ‘an uneasiness of the mind for want of some absent good’ (EHU ii 21.31 = R 174). An ‘uneasiness’ is some desire independent of reasoning about the good. Any exercise of practical reason infulencing our desire presupposes some desire, not formed by practical reason, for some end. In each action our end is pleasure, forming our conception of good; our ultimate end is happiness,⁶ which is an extreme of pleasure. 
- Locke rejects Aquinas’ view of the character of happiness and its role in explaining desire. Aquinas regards happiness as ultimate because it is universal; it is not a specifci end that excludes the pursuit of other things for their own sake. Hence, our pursuit of happiness for its own sake does not yet give us any specific goal of our desire. On these points Locke disagrees, since he treats happiness as pleasure. If we pursue pleasure as our only ultimate end, we do not pursue types of actions or states of character for their own sake, since these other things cannot be components of pleasure in the way they can be components of happiness (as Aristotle and Aquinas understand happiness).
- He uses Hobbesian arguments to show that we cannot intelligibly attribute freedom or unfreedom to the will, and that we act freely as long as we act on our desires rather than being forced by external pressure
- He agrees with Hobbes and Hutcheson that action depends ultimately on some non-rational impulse, which Locke calls ‘uneasiness’. Apparently, then, he ought to say that action is the result of the strongest desire, so that the greater uneasiness always determines our action. Locke, however, suggests that this appeal to strength of desire is too simple. We can ‘suspend’ the execution of our desires; we consider whether it is really good or bad to satisfy them, and we try to decide which ones it is better on the whole to satisfy.¹² This is ‘not a fault, but a perfection of our nature’ (47). Here we find freedom that is no less genuine than the sort of freedom that implies indeterminism. Determination in itself is no obstacle to freedom. The capacity for ‘suspension’ and rational consideration raises a diffciulty for Hobbesian simple compatibilism. It conflicts with Hobbes’s view that all action caused by desire is equally free; for someone who acts on passion without the refelxion that Locke describes is less free than someone who acts as a result of rational refelxion. And so a Hobbesian compatibilist account of action deprives us of a type of freedom that is morally significant. Locke implies that, within a compatibilist account of freedom, rationally determined actions are freer than others. It is difficult, however, for a simple compatibilist, and for Locke, to explain how we examine competing desires and weigh one of their objects against another. Locke argues that when we recognize that there is more to be said for choosing x than for choosing y, we also recognize that it is more reasonable to choose x rather than y, and that in choosing x we choose the better. He therefore recognizes some special connexion between reason and the choice of the better.¹⁵ If we choose the better, we do not simply choose on the basis of instrumental reasoning; for we also rely on instrumental reasoning in choosing the means to satisfy an incontinent desire. Why, then, is it more rational to act on this prudent desire (the one for maximum overall pleasure) than to act on the incontinent desire? Contrary to a Hobbesian account, practical reason seems to tell us which end it is more reasonable to pursue; hence it does not seem to be confnied to deliberation about instrumental means to some end that appeals to us independently of reason. The same question arises for Hobbes in his attempts to connect practical reason with judgments about the future. Locke, therefore, raises serious objections to Hobbes’s position. He recognizes the existence of rational desires for the better, which do not allow a sentimentalist analysis. These desires cast doubt on the sentimentalist account of freewill and of the virtues; for if the sentimentalist conception of virtue does not make rational desire primary, it seems to undermine freewill. 
- Even Hobbes, who goes furthest in a voluntarist direction, believes that what fits human nature is independent of God’s legislative will; that is why the laws of nature are counsels of self-preservation. But Hobbes does not believe that God commands obedience to these natural laws because they preserve human society; the commands are not an exercise of God’s benevolence or of God’s care for creation, but of God’s power. Culverwell, Locke, Cumberland, and Pufendorf reject this part of Hobbes’s view; they agree that in some way God necessarily chooses to command observance of the natural law that preserves human society. On this point they agree with Suarez. They differ from Suarez, and from one another, in their views about whether the element of natural law that is independent of command and will is also morality. None of them defends Suarez’s combination of naturalism (about right and wrong) and voluntarism (about obligation and law).
- He abandon Culverwell’s unsatisfactory compromise that we cannot recognise intrinsic rightness without recognising a requirement (debitum). He prefers a more thoroughly voluntarist position that rejects intrinsic rightness. 
- Locke accepts Suarez’s claim that natural law expresses facts about what is appropriate (conveniens) to rational nature, and that these facts do not depend on God’s legislative will
- Locke seems to see even less place for natural rightness without obligation. If we are not under an obligation, our only reason for action is selfpreservation (sui ipsius cura et conservatio). If that is our only reason, virtue is no longer a duty (officium), but a mere advantage (commodum), and the right is reduced to the advantageous (nec homini quid honestum erit nisi quod utile).
- If we feel like disregarding the law of nature, it will not be blameworthy (crimen), though it may be disadvantageous 
- Contrary to Carneades, Locke argues that advantage and disadvantage are an inadequate basis for justice. Duties (offciia) do not arise simply out of one’s own advantage; in fact many virtues are disadvantageous, since they benefti others at our own expense.⁴⁷ Since different people’s advantages confilct, it is impossible to aim at everyone’s advantage at the same time.⁴⁸ 
- Locke’s argument seems to neglect a possibility that Suarez allows. For Locke seems to suggest that if obligation (proceeding from the command of a superior) is set aside, all that is left is advantage. Since advantage is an insufficient basis for duties, Locke assumes that we need the command of a superior. But his assumption is unjustified, if we allow natural intrinsic rightness (honestas) as well as natural advantage.⁴⁹
- Hobbes, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all reject intrinsic rightness. Though Locke does not endorse their position explicitly, he seems to agree with it. 
- natural law obliges us because of God’s power, which makes the threat of punishment credible. This is Hobbes’s position. Parker agrees with this element in Hobbes, despite his opposition to Hobbes on other points. Locke also seems to agree with Hobbes. 
- His examination of natural law supports the moral outlook of the Essay, where he describes the morally good and evil as conformity to a law that offers pleasure as a reward for obedience and pain as a penalty for disobedience.⁵⁰ He prefers this view to the Hobbist view, and the view of the ‘old philosophers’, the Aristotelians who believe in intrinsic morality, and take immorality to consist in violations of the dignity of human nature. Against these views Locke asserts that morality is based on divine commands and sanctions.
- Though Locke accepts Hobbes’s basic claims about motivation, he disagrees with Hobbes about how morality appeals to the desire for pleasure. Hobbes believes the laws of nature can be shown to promote self-preservation even without reference to divine commands. He offers his two indirect arguments—from morality to preservation of the commonwealth and from preservation of the commonwealth to self-preservation—to connect morality with self-preservation and hence (according to Hobbes’s views on motivation) with one’s own pleasure. 
- It is not clear where Locke disagrees with Hobbes. He believes that divine sanctions are necessary for morality because he does not assume, as Hobbes does, that divine laws prescribe actions that we would see to be advantageous for us in any case. He ought, then, to question at least one of Hobbes’s two indirect arguments, but it is not clear which of them he doubts. Since he assumes it is possible to secure one’s own advantage by violating moral rules, he may accept the argument that Hobbes ascribes to the fool. He regards morality as a way of securing the public interest, but not of securing everyone’s interest. 
- Locke seems to see that if we ought to obey God’s commands simply because God commands us to, we face the infinite regress that Cudworth urges against Hobbes. The moral basis of God’s right to command cannot itself lie in God’s command.
- Locke agrees with Cudworth’s objection to Hobbes, and argues that we are morally required to obey only a command that comes from a legitimate commander, who has ‘power and dominion’ (ELN 184).⁵⁴ To explain the nature of this dominion, Locke distinguishes disobedience to a legitimate ruler from disobedience to the orders of a pirate or robber. In the second case, conscience approves our exercise of our right (ius) in consulting our own safety; but in the first, it condemns our violation of the right of another (ELN 184). In Locke’s view, God is a legitimate commander who is entitled to command. 
- Hence the requirement to obey God seems to be based in facts about our nature. According to Locke, it is inseparable from the nature of human beings that they are required (teneri) to love and worship God and to fulfil the other things that are appropriate (convenientia) to rational nature
- If a principle based on natural appropriateness is the moral basis of our obedience to God’s commands, the obligation of the law of nature rests on a principle of natural morality. This cannot be simply a principle of natural utility; for that might require submission to a pirate or robber no less than to a legitimate ruler. If we are required in conscience to obey God, obedience is required by natural rightness (honestas), and therefore by a principle of natural intrinsic morality. Though he does not speak, as Suarez does, of natural duties (debita) in these cases,⁵⁶ they must be duties, if they are to include some moral basis for obedience to God. Here, then, Locke implicitly agrees with Suarez’s distinction between natural morality and the obligation that results from divine command. 
- Intrinsic morality holds this tenuous, but indispensable, place in the Essays on the Law of Nature. The same is true in the Essay. Even though the Essay moves away from the Scholastic framework of the earlier work towards an explicitly Hobbesian position, Locke still maintains that our reason for obeying God depends on something more than our recognition of God’s irresistible power.⁶¹ Our recognition of God’s right as creator and the recognition of God’s goodness and wisdom seem to give us two reasons, apart from God’s power, for obeying God. 






#                  Difficulties

- It is difficult to say whether hedonism or anti-rationalism comes first in Locke’s argument. Each claim supports the other, but both are open to dispute. 
- He even argues that it would be unreasonable to expect God to command us to do anything that we would have sufficient reason to do anyhow; he thinks such a command would be superfulous.⁵³ This argument about superfluity is weak. Divine commands are not superfluous if they add further reasons. Even if they carried no sanctions, the knowledge that God has ordered us to do something would give some people a further reason to do what they have some reason to do already; the addition of sanctions gives yet another reason. This remark seems difficult to reconcile with Locke’s claim that God would not command us to do actions we could see a reason to do anyhow; for if God commanded no such actions, could we maintain our belief in God’s goodness and wisdom? If Locke were right, our belief in God’s wisdom and goodness would have to be wholly independent of any views we might form about the tendency of the actions that God actually commands and forbids.