- Tries to find why we have our moral beliefs
- Mackie believes that since there would be real moral facts only if there were divine commands of the right sort, and since there are no appropriate divine commands, moral judgments are not true.
- Mackie agrees with Pufendorf’s claim that moral properties are not part of the natural world that we understand through the physical sciences; Mackie expresses this point by claiming that moral entities are ‘queer’. He does not mean to rule out the logical possibility of objective values. He suggests that there would be objective values within a specific theological framework (which he rejects). Theological moralists might argue that God created human beings with a specific good; this would be an objective fact, but not an objective value. Objective values, however, enter with ‘objective prescriptivity’, which results from divine commands.³⁸ 
- Suarez insists that without divine commands there are only ‘indicative’ facts, and that divine commands are needed for genuine prescriptions, but he believes that the right sorts of indicative facts are suffciient for moral facts. Pufendorf and Mackie agree against Suarez that genuine moral principles must be prescriptive. Pufendorf and Mackie, therefore, may both accept this argument: (1) Moral rightness exists if and only if there are objectively prescriptive truths.³⁹ (2) If there are no divine commands, there are no objectively prescriptive truths. (3) Hence, if there are no divine commands, there is no moral rightness, and moral nihilism is true. (4) If, however, there are divine commands (with the right content), there are objectively prescriptive moral truths, and hence there is moral rightness.⁴⁰ Mackie may not agree entirely with Pufendorf about the role of divine commands. He may, for instance, believe that it is a purely empirical fact that there are no objective values apart from divine commands, whereas Pufendorf might believe (if he were to confront the question) that this can be known a priori. 










#                  Difficulties

- To accept this argument,we must agreet hat morality requires objective prescriptivity and that divine commands secure precisely this objective prescriptivity. But Mackie’s different remarks about objective prescriptivity make it difficult to agree on both points at once: (1) He suggests that objective values both give us knowledge of what to do and cause us, through our recognition of them, to try to do it; our recognition by itself ensures correct action.⁴¹ (2) His second clarification of objective prescriptivity turns to Kant’s notion of a categorical imperative. A categorical imperative rests on a reason that is independent of any desire of the agent that would be satisfeid by acting on the imperative.⁴² Mackie takes his denial of objectively prescriptive entities or truths to be the denial of categorical imperatives.⁴³ If he takes objectively prescriptive entities to require the internal connexion between knowledge and motivation that he attributes to Plato’s Forms, he must also take categorical imperatives to involve reasons that we cannot recognize without being motivated to act on the imperatives. (3) In his discussion of categorical imperatives, Mackie sees that an imperative, understood as a simple command in the imperative mood, need not be an objectively prescriptive categorical imperative. If the command presupposes that the agents addressed have some specific desire or inclination, it is really a hypothetical imperative.⁴⁴ (4) His next clarifciation of objective prescriptivity rests on partial acceptance of a non-naturalist analysis of some moral terms in some of their uses. The non-natural element indicates the action-guiding aspect of the alleged objective value, and hence introduces objective prescriptivity.⁴⁵ But do divine commands introduce objective prescriptivity? Mackie’s most stringent test for objective prescriptivity requires an internal connexion between knowledge of objective values and motivation to follow their prescriptions; it must be logically impossible to know them and not to act on them. Divine commands fail this test; for it is logically possible to know that something has been commanded by God without wanting to do anything about it. Even if the demand for a categorical imperative does not require such a tight internal connexion, divine commands do not automatically count. As Mackie agrees, commands might presuppose different sorts of motives or desires in the person commanded. The mere fact that divine commands are commands, and therefore are imperatives of some kind, does not make them categorical imperatives. 
- What, then, makes them categorical imperatives? Two answers seem possible: 
    - God can be relied on to command us to observe principles that are (whether or not God commands them) categorical imperatives. Neither of these answers supports Mackie. The first answer admits categorical imperatives apart from God’s commands. 
    - Since it is a categorical imperative that we ought to obey God’s commands, God’s commanding us to act in various ways presents us with categorical imperatives, and hence introduces objective prescriptivity. The second answer presupposes at least one categorical imperative apart from God’s commands—the requirement of obedience to God. In either case, God’s commands cannot be the only source of objective prescriptivity, but presuppose that some principle other than a divine command is objectively prescriptive. 
- If we believe that divine commands are necessary for morality because they introduce moral normativity, we face two objections: 
    - If normativity is understood as objective prescriptivity, we have quite good reason to doubt whether morality really needs to be normative after all. It is not clear that morality requires the internal connexion that Mackie describes between knowledge and motivation. 
    - If morality requires objective prescriptivity, divine commands do not give us morality, because they do not give us objective prescriptivity. 