- Christianity conflicts with Greek ethics
- An indeterminist doctrine of responsibility fits the doctrine of Christian predestination
- Christian doctrine to require the decisive rejection of an Aristotelian framework
- Rejects Reciprocity of virtues
- argues that since Christians perform virtuous actions for the honour of God, their end in performing such actions is different from the end of a pagan who performs the same actions. Since different ends define different virtues, the virtues of pagans and of Christians differ specifically, not just numerically
- Voluntarism is true
- He allows dispensations that would give permission to violate a precept without revoking it. 
- Ockham has become notorious for holding views that, from a later philosophical perspective, have appeared to undermine the Aristotelian outlook that is expounded by Aquinas.
- He believes, for instance, that Aristotle’s rejection of Platonic Forms supports the metaphysical priority of the particular, and that the views of Aquinas and Scotus on universals concede too much to an un-Aristotelian Platonic realism
- Ockham agrees with Scotus’ view that Aquinas’ intellectualism and eudaemonism conflict with the freedom and contingency of human action. Since Aristotle insists on these features of human action, a plausible defence of Aristotle should, in Ockham’s view, reject Aquinas’ position. Similarly, Ockham gives Aristotelian reasons for rejecting Aquinas’ claims about virtue, practical reason, and prudence. 
- Ockham rejects eudaemonism, because he agrees with Scotus in believing that we do not necessarily will happiness
- Ockham also argues against eudaemonism on the ground that the will is a free capacity and can therefore receive two contrary actualities. If the will is free, then, in Ockham’s view, it must be free to refuse happiness; hence we cannot will the ultimate end naturally, unless ‘naturally’ means simply that we most commonly do it. If the will is free, it can refuse happiness, both in general and in particular, because otherwise it would lose the indifference needed for freedom 
- Control and power over one’s actions comes from freewill,⁸ which involves indifference and contingency.⁹ Hence it requires metaphysical indeterminism 
- Scotus argues that the will is free to choose either of two opposite courses of action, and that therefore nothing outside the will determines our choice; hence the greater apparent good does not determine the wil 
- Ockham does not follow Scotus in treating the will as essentially rational; nor does he connect freedom with the affection for justice. Instead, he emphasizes indifference, contingency, and self-determination. 
- According to Ockham, Scotus’ claims about the self-determining character of the will conflict with the primacy that Scotus assigns to the affection for justice. Ockham asserts the independence of the will from reason and makes reason simply the servant of the will. 
- Whereas external or internal stimuli determine the passions, nothing determines the will; even considerations presented by the intellect cannot determine it. 
- Ockham rejects the connexion that Scotus sees between freewill and the affection for justice, but he still connects freedom with reason. Though he rejects intellectualism, and even abandons the elements of intellectualism in Scotus’ position, he still (according to our previous distinctions) maintains rationalism rather than anti-rationalism, in so far as he distinguishes the rational will from the non-rational passions 
- Though he rejects intellectualism, and even abandons the elements of intellectualism in Scotus’ position, he still (according to our previous distinctions) maintains rationalism rather than anti-rationalism, in so far as he distinguishes the rational will from the non-rational passions.
- Since one’s will does not necessarily conform to one’s correct reason, correct reason itself cannot ensure virtue, but may be present in either a virtuous or a vicious agent.
An agent who chooses to act for a bad end may have correct reason but freely choose to disregard it; hence correct reason is not the primary cause of virtuous action. Virtuous action needs both actual prudence and the activity of the will
- Ockham agrees that prudence accords with correct reason, so that prudence is a partial efficient cause of the virtuous action. It is not the whole efficient cause, however, because virtue requires an independent act of willing in accordance with the dictates of correct reason. Since this is an act of a will that is free to reject any dictate of reason, it does not result from attention to a decisive practical consideration; for if there were such a consideration, its decisiveness would limit the freedom of the will. No consideration, therefore, moves the will reliably. 
- Ockham offers one answer to a difficulty that faces Aristotle’s claims about the relation between prudence and virtue of character. When Aristotle claims that virtue makes the end right and prudence the means, we might take this in an anti-rationalist sense, so as to imply that correctly-oriented passions make the end right.²⁷ Ockham approaches this anti-rationalist interpretation, though he does not completely accept it. He takes Aristotle’s references to a non-rational part to indicate the role of will, and so he infers that an act of will, independent of reason, is essential to virtue. Ockham does not deny that virtue is more reasonable than vice; in Hutcheson’s terms, he grants that we have justifying reasons in favour of virtue rather than vice.²⁸ But he denies that these justifying reasons supply the virtuous person with decisive motivating reasons. 










# Difficulties 

- In terms of rejecting that we always pursue happiness, he argues, that:
    - in some circumstances we might believe we cannot achieve happiness, and therefore might cease to will to be happy. But even if we think that happiness can't be achieved fully, we may think that we can get closer to it      
    - If we will not to exist, we thereby also will not to be happy. We may think that to live in a shame is worse than to be alive
- Intellectualist arguments may convince us that a voluntarist conception of the will also blurs the distinction between will and passion, since it does not make will essentially rational. We might respond by rejecting the division between will and passion. If the mere fact that an action is self-determined (according to the voluntarist conception) does not make it morally more significant, we may infer that the contrast between the will and the non-rational impulses is not morally significant either. Hence we might as well say that the will is a sort of passion, or that reason is the servant of the passions no less than of the will. 
- He rejects Aquinas’ view that virtue must belong to the sensory part because the sensory part has to be perfected (3Sent. q11 = OT vi 352). He agrees with Scotus in placing virtue in the will (354), because only a condition of the will is properly a virtue. But This argument shows only that the will must be one subject of virtue, and that any other subject of it must be closely enough connected to the will to make the virtue as a whole praiseworthy. But this conclusion does not conflict with the basic elements of Aquinas’ position. Nor does it justify Ockham’s further claim that the will is the only subject of virtue, so that the passions cannot also be a subject.
- Ockham claims that his view is consistent with Aristotle. According to Ockham, Aristotle’s frequent remarks that the virtues of character are in the non-rational part mean that these virtues are in the will, not that they are in the passions; the will is a ‘non-rational’ part because it is rational only by participation (3Sent. q11 = OT vi 368.14–21).²² But even if Aristotle treats the will as non-rational in this sense, his remarks about the role of the non-rational part of the soul in virtue do not seem to fit the will. For he explains his claim that the moral virtues are in the non-rational part by discussing the training of passions, pleasure, and pain. He refers to this aspect of the non-rational part (contrary to Ockham’s view) when he takes moral virtue to be virtue of the non-rational part. 