- He believes Cumberland has the right conception of the basis of natural law; he seeks to make this conception clear without Cumberland’s abstruseness and difficulty. But it is not clear that he adheres to the voluntarist elements of Cumberland’s view.³⁵ 
- Sometimes Parker argues that we need a demonstration of the existence of God and knowledge of God’s designs, if we are to support claims about the obligation of natural law. An appeal to our moral conceptions and our presumed recognition of an inward law is too insecure and unreliable (DA 5); Parker seems to agree with Culverwell’s suggestion that without divine commands we have a ‘mere cipher’. But he also claims that as long as we ‘act sincerely and meditate impartially upon the nature of things’, we can find out our duty (DA 9). He often repeats both of these claims, but he does not reconcile them. He asserts that the existence of God is necessary for obligation.³⁶ But when he argues against Hobbes’s view that there are no moral obligations in the state of nature, he takes facts about the human condition and human nature to require respect for property. His claims are consistent if he agrees with Culverwell, Cumberland, and Pufendorf in claiming that without a divine command some courses of action are unreasonable, and others are rationally appropriate, but no action is morally right or wrong because none is obligatory. But he also seems to allow obligations and morality independent of divine commands. 
- He speaks of right reason requiring something, and about the extent and limits of its obligation, on the assumption that it imposes some obligation (DA 39). Similarly, an obligation follows from the principle of seeking the public good (DA 40). Nature, not only God, is a source of obligations.³⁸ Even if obligation includes the necessity of acting in accordance with a law, Parker does not infer that we must assume a divine legislator. He believes that our recognition of x’s being necessary for happiness can be source of obligation to x for us (DA 60). Though God adds sanctions, or ‘enforcements’, to laws, they would apparently still be laws without these enforcements. But despite these apparent concessions to naturalism, Parker reasserts his initial claim that God is the source of all moral obligation.
- Having rejected these Greek views, he argues that virtue can secure happiness only in an afterlife, and that therefore we are obliged to be virtuous only if we are assured of an afterlife in which virtue results in happiness. According to this view, - Parker’s views about the afterlife commit him to a rather extreme version of theological voluntarism. morality is obligatory not simply because God commands the observance of certain principles, but because God both commands them and attaches sanctions to them. 
- natural law obliges us because of God’s power, which makes the threat of punishment credible. This is Hobbes’s position. Parker agrees with this element in Hobbes, despite his opposition to Hobbes on other points. 









#                  Difficulties

- Since God is the author of all the causal relations in the world, we can judge from the good effects of some actions and the bad effects of others what the will of God is; and all our obligation depends on this will.³⁹ Perhaps he has in mind the role of God as creator, rather than legislator; in that case he may make Pufendorf’s mistake of assuming that insofar as God created beings who have moral duties to God, God is the legislator who creates obligations by legislation.⁴⁰ 
- We can see some reason to follow the laws of nature in their natural consequences in this life; these facts about the world manifest God’s creative will. But they are not enough, because (in his view) we have no obligation to be virtuous unless virtue infallibly assures our happiness (86). We would secure the relevant obligation if the Greek moralists were right to believe that virtue is sufficient for happiness or for the most important parts of it (88–9). But Parker disagrees with the Greek moralists. His argument against them assumes a broadly hedonistic conception of happiness, which leads him to misunderstand the Stoic and the Aristotelian and Platonic position. He argues against Hobbes that we can see reasons for being virtuous if we reflect on human nature and the human condition, and that these reasons introduce obligations independent of belief in God and an afterlife. In his attempt to show the importance of Christian belief for sound morality, Parker seems to attack some of the grounds for obligation that he has recognized. 
- Parker seems to imply that only one answer is open to us: we have to obey the laws of nature as divine commands, because God has attached rewards and punishments to them. This purely instrumental attitude to morality is open to the objections that Shaftesbury directs against some orthodox Christian moralists. It is also open to objections that Parker suggests; for he argues against Hobbes that we have non-instrumental reasons to care about morality. 