- Moral terms can't be reduced to non-moral ones
- Rationalism (virtue = to be guided by praxtical reason) is true
- Non-instrumental and overriding value of morality are true
- Intuitionism is true: we can grasp principles of benevolence independently of grasping principles of justice. And they may conflict. Then, to resolve the conflict, we need third grasping of principles
- Argues that Hutcheson’s belief in a moral sense requires him to reject realism and the metaphysical independence of morality. 
- oppose theological voluntarism. 
- An appeal to Scripture and reason seemed to many Dissenters — notably Price — to undermine the dogmas set out in the historic creeds, and in particular the doctrine of the Trinity
- InPrice, the belief in intrinsic morality is separated from naturalism,
- Balguy, Price, and Reid, who develop and defend Clarke’s rationalism in more detail, and examine some of the objections about moral knowledge, motivation, and justification that seem to arise for Clarke.
- Price notices this parallel between egoism and utilitarianism.²⁹ His argument against egoism is quite similar to Hutcheson’s, but he believes that the same sort of argument undermines Hutcheson’s utilitarianism. Though his argument does not do justice to indirect utilitarianism, it raises serious questions about Hutcheson’s whole system. 
- It would be consistent to agree with Doddridge and Grove about the divine nature against voluntarists and sentimentalists, and still to accept utilitarianism; for one might argue that a perfectly reasonable agent will accept utilitarianism. Cumberland holds that God rationally chooses to promote the common good because this is the reasonable end; and one might defend a parallel claim about utility. Hutcheson’s rationalist opponents, however, deny that practical reason supports utilitarianism; Balguy, Butler, Doddridge, and Price all maintain that practical reason imposes some limits on the pursuit of maximum utility.
- Price follows Butler in claiming both that self-love is a rational principle and that the object of one’s self-love is simply happiness, conceived as pleasure.²⁷
- pluralist intuitionist view defended by Price and Reid.⁴⁴ This view recognizes a number of ultimate principles none of which is supreme, and none of which provides any systematic reasoned basis for deciding conflicts among principles. 
- Price and Sidgwick agree with this criticism of Butler, and infer that he ought not to have maintained the harmony of self-love and conscience.⁶⁷ But the doctrine of harmony is neither an optional extra in Butler’s position nor a mere persuasive device for commending morality to those who do not accept it for better reasons. We have seen that it is also part of Butler’s defence of the natural character of conscience and morality.⁶⁸ If Butler abandoned the doctrine of harmony, he would seriously weaken his naturalism as well. Price and Sidgwick seethis,andsotheyabandonButler’snaturalismwhentheyabandonhisdoctrineofharmony. 
- Both Hume and Price notice that Hutcheson’s position on authority is unsatisfactory. In Hume’s view, the concession to Butler is a mistake. In Price’s view, Hutcheson is right to agree with Butler, but wrong to suppose that the moral sense meets Butler’s conditions for an authoritative principle.²⁰ Both critics argue, from their opposite points of view, that Hutcheson can restore consistency to his position only by moving either to a more rationalist or to a more anti-rationalist view.
- Price and Reid, following Butler, reject sentimentalism, and so reject the sentimentalist argument for utilitarianism. They believe that their meta-ethical rationalism and their non-utilitarian account of justice confirm each other, and that both views rest on ordinary moral convictions. 
- He presents his moral philosophy as part of a systematic philosophical outlook; he argues that rationalist ethics gains support from its relation to his general epistemological position.⁷ 
- In contrast to Hobbes, Butler, Hutcheson, and Hume,⁸ Price begins not with an account of human nature, but with questions in moral epistemology. His epistemological argument is fundamental; ‘if I have failed here, I have failed in my chief design’ (3). His most original contribution to moral theory is perhaps his special emphasis on epistemology rather than on psychology. His epistemological emphasis does not abandon moral psychology, but imposes a condition of adequacy on any account of human nature. If our account of human nature leaves us without the capacity to acquire the sort of knowledge that our epistemology tells us we acquire, or if it leaves us with no account of how this knowledge could guide our action, the account has to be revised. 
- In Hutcheson psychology determines epistemology; for he believes that the sort of moral knowledge that rationalists attribute to us could not influence our actions in the way that moral knowledge plainly does, and so he infers that his moral psychology shows the error in rationalist epistemology.⁹ Price seems to reverse Hutcheson’s direction of argument.
He claims that since the kind of knowledge that clearly guides our action does not fit into Hutcheson’s moral psychology, that moral psychology must be wrong. He does not, therefore, discuss the questions in moral psychology very extensively in their own right.
- Price approaches questions about self-love and other affections through a general view of affections (69). Affections are distinguished by their objects, and their objects essentially includedistinctiveends; curiosity, forinstance, istheloveofwhat isnewanduncommon, and ambition is the love of fame. Hume includes affections of this sort under the passions, which he takes to be distinguished by their distinctive sensations, connected only empirically with their objects. Price, by contrast, takes a distinctive object and a distinctive end to be internally connected to a given affection. Hence, he claims, psychological egoism—understood as the doctrine that we desire everything simply as a means to our own good—implies that we really have only one affection, self-love. 
- In affirming this internal connexion between affection, object, and end, Price maintains that pride is necessarily pride in some apparent good, and humiliation necessarily responds to an apparent evil. Hume, on the contrary, takes these connexions of emotions to objects to be contingent. Hence he believes that passions cannot be reasonable or unreasonable, because they do not admit of truth or falsehood. Price takes the more plausible view that passions may be reasonable or unreasonable, and some actually are reasonable. 
- He uses his account of affections and their objects to support Butler’s attack on psycho-logical hedonism (74–6). He argues that any pleasure in obtaining x presupposes a prior affection for x. Since we have an affection for x only if we desire x for its own sake, the pleasure in obtaining x presupposes a desire for x for its own sake; hence we cannot consistently claim that we take pleasure in obtaining the object of our desires and that the only thing we desire for its own sake is pleasure.
Price fails, as Butler fails, to show that every pleasure presupposes an independent desire for its object.¹⁰ But the exaggeration does not defeat Price’s main point. If any pleasures are value-dependent, they raise a difficulty for psychological hedonism. 
- The internal connexions between pleasure and desire, and between desire, object, and end, suggest to Price that a pleasure is internally connected to its object.¹¹ If our pleas-ure in friendship is essentially directed towards friendship, pleasure cannot be all we want. If we could gain pleasure equivalent to or greater than the pleasure of friend-ship, but without friendship, we would still want friendship in addition to this added pleasure. 
- Price follows Butler not only in his rejection of psychological hedonism, but also in a concession to prudential hedonism, identifying the object of rational self-love with happiness, and identifying this happiness with pleasure. He seems to take the equivalence of happiness and pleasure for granted. When he argues against the view that virtue secures happiness, he contents himself with listing the painful incidents that sometimes result from virtue. 
- Price defends the rational character of self-love by arguing that our desire for happiness cannot be the product of instinct.²¹To suggest that a desire is instinctive, as Price understands the term, is to suggest that we could have been the same sorts of beings as we are but have lacked this particular desire. If, for instance, we tend to prefer the taste of sweet things over sour things, but could have been the sorts of beings that we are without this preference, our preference is instinctive.
On this basis, Price distinguishes:
    - affections - Affections are ‘desires founded in the reasonable nature itself, and essential to it; such as self-love, benevolence, and the love of truth’ (74). They belong to reasonable natures because they are reasonable desires to have, not because they happen to be found in reasonable creatures.²² A creature would not be reasonable if it did not see the reasons that support such desires and were not moved by these reasons. Affections in this general sense may be strengthened by ‘instinctive determinations’; we not only recognize, and act on, the reasonableness of concern for our own interest, but we also have a non-essential feeling that favours it, and this feeling (we might say) gives us a Humean exciting reason that supports the non-Humean exciting reason that belongs to us as reasonable creatures. Once he has distinguished affections from passions, Price denies that the desire for happiness is simply a passion.²³ Since it is not instinctive, it is a rational principle, and it is contrary to reason to refrain from pursuing happiness, either for oneself or for others 
    - passions
- The question draws attention to an important aspect of eudaemonism. We might wrongly take a eudaemonist to rely on an empirical, though universal, feature of human beings, that they desire happiness. This is how Kant interprets the desire for happiness.²⁴ Price rejects this interpretation, because he believes the desire is necessary for a rational agent. Price’s conception of happiness, however, does not fit his claim that the desire for happiness is necessary for a rational agent. The pursuit of happiness does not seem rationally necessary, if happiness and pleasure (as a hedonist understands it) are identified. Unless pleasure is defined so as to imply a necessary connexion between pleasure and the fulfilment of desire, it does not seem obvious that every rational agent must pursue pleasure. Even if we take pleasure to be a by-product of fulfilled desire, it does not seem obvious that rational agents must actually pursue pleasure; why could they not care simply about the fulfilment of their desire and be indifferent about the pleasure resulting from it? Price makes it difficult to see why the desire for happiness expresses a rational principle that is necessary for a rational agent. 
- Price rejects the sentimentalist conception of moral judgment and the anti-rationalist conception of will and action on which it rests. He seems to be a rationalist about motivation in general, not just about morality. He believes that some objects have a ‘natural aptitude’ to please or displease us.²⁸ Relying on his distinction between affections and passions, he argues that we have certain desires and reactions not because we are first reasonable beings and then acquire the appropriate affections, but simply because we recognize reasons.
- In his view, motives are not ‘physical efficients and agents’ (211; cf. 183n);³³ they cannot effect our determination, and our judgments are not physically connected with our action (183n).
We might take these remarks in either of two ways: 
    - Motives cannot be parts of sufficient causal conditions for our actions, because our actions have no sufficient causal conditions. This interpretation commits Price to indeterminism. 
    - Even if our motives cause our actions, we are still the causes of our actions. This simply commits him to some account of the cause of our actions that makes ourselves the cause. If such an account can be offered within determinist assumptions, it should satisfy the demands implied in the second claim. Price seems to recognize that responsibility may not require indeterminism.³⁴ If a doctrine of necessity can be explained so as to retain his claims about agency, it allows moral responsibility. But he does not say what sort of doctrine of necessity would satisfy him. Hume, for instance, presents a doctrine of necessity that he takes to be compatible with the freedom that is relevant to moral responsibility. But Price does not say whether Hume’s version of the doctrine of necessity safeguards responsibility. He might reasonably claim that Hume’s view deprives the self and the rational will of an appropriate role in free action. 
- Since Price rejects sentimentalism about desire and action, he has no reason to favour sentimentalism about moral properties. In his view, it is not only unnecessary for capturing the connexion between morality and action, but also morally inadequate. He argues for a combination of rationalism and realism. He assumes, as Cudworth does, that rationalism and realism are inseparable. We might question this assumption. For might we not accept rationalism and still believe that our moral knowledge is knowledge of the tendencies of our own reason, rather than knowledge of objective moral properties?³⁵ Alternatively, might we not reject rationalism and believe that sense, either the ordinary senses or an additional sense, gives us moral knowledge of external reality?³⁶ Price concentrates on realist rationalism and an anti-realist doctrine of a moral sense because he rejects a moral sense and embraces rationalism. He allows that if Hutcheson’s doctrine of the moral sense asserted only that moral judgments are immediate, it would be innocuous. But it is not innocuous when Hutcheson adds that moral properties have the status of secondary qualities. Price agrees with Hutcheson in believing that secondary qualities are not genuine differences in objects themselves, but simply reflect features of ourselves and our reactions (14).³⁷ He does not endorse Reid’s more robustly realist account of the senses and their objects, and so he does not regard belief in a moral sense as a reliable support for objectivism about moral properties (280–3).³⁸ 
- According to Price, moral properties would be objects of a moral sense only if they did not belong to actions and people themselves, but belonged only to our reactions.³⁹ Hutcheson derives this conclusion illegitimately from the immediacy of moral judgments.⁴⁰ In Price’s view, we must support the intellectual character of moral judgments and their correspondence to external reality, by rejecting the moral sense.
He rejects a moral sense theory by rejecting empiricism in general. He argues, for reasons similar to Cudworth’s, that many of the ideas that Locke takes to be derived from the senses are in fact derived from the understanding. He claims, for instance, that some ideas about causation are derived from understanding, since the senses give us experience only of succession. While Price agrees with Hume about what we learn from experience, he does not agree with Hume’s conclusion about the idea of necessary connexion (25–8). The understanding is the source of its own simple ideas, which are preconditions, not products, of reasoning (40). A moral sense theory is wrong because moral properties are not the sorts of properties that we grasp through a sense.
To prove his point, Price appeals to our intuitive belief that moral properties belong to actions in themselves, not simply to our reactions to them; when we call an action wrong, we attribute a property to the action itself, not to its effect on us as spectators.⁴¹ He admits that this intuitive belief is open to dispute, since it may be dismissed as the product of false ‘objectification’, the tendency of our mind to ‘spread itself’ (as Hume says) on objects (46 #1).
In reply he points out the absurdities (as he considers them) that result from the subjectivist position. He uses a version of Cudworth’s argument about mutability, claiming that his opponents’ view makes moral properties mutable in relation to certain other properties that in fact make no difference to moral properties.⁴² Defenders of a moral sense theory reject this criticism. In reply to Burnet and Balguy, Hutcheson argues that the senses are corrigible, but sensory qualities do not exist independ-ently of our perceptions of them. This defence of the subjectivist position does not answer Price. For if the views of the normal perceiver constitute correctness, moral properties are still mutable, not in relation to any particular perceiver, but in relation to changes in normal perceivers. People in general may become, say, more or less prone to approve compassion, benevolence, or honesty. But these qualities themselves do not become better or worse with these changes in perceivers. Hence, according to Price, sentimentalism mistakes the character of moral properties. 
- Price argues that if moral properties were mutable in the way that follows from sentimentalism, all actions would be indifferent in their own right.⁴³ In that case we would have no reason not to alter our reactions so that we did not care about doing what we at present take to be right. Rejection of objective right and wrong removes our reason for resisting any anti-moral tendencies.⁴⁴ Subjectivists resist Price’s effort to represent them as enemies of morality. Hutcheson recognizes that our moral reactions have a compulsory character that is inconsistent with the view that we are simply aiming at pleasure and the absence of pain; it is not indifferent whether we have them or not, but we are in some way required to have them.⁴⁵ We do not treat them as we might treat feelings of pain that we would rather get rid of. Hutcheson can therefore answer Price by pointing out that our moral outlook ascribes to moral judgments the compulsory character that Price recognizes. We need not believe in objective moral properties, therefore, if we treat our moral judgments as compulsory.
Price, however, need not accept this defence of Hutcheson. The moral sense theorist can show that it is psychologically possible to regard our moral judgments as compulsory. But this proof (if we concede it) of psychological possibility does not capture the reason we think we have for regarding our judgments as compulsory. Price points out that sometimes we regard our judgment as compulsory because it is constrained by the nature of the objects of our judgment. A purely psychological explanation of why we regard the relevant judgments as non-optional would miss the point; for we regard the non-optional character of the judgment that fire burns wood as the result of a fact about fire. Price argues that in the same way we regard the non-optional character of our moral judgments as the result of facts about right and wrong actions.⁴⁶ We do not simply find that we cannot bring ourselves to regard the harming of innocent people as right; we also believe that if nothing changed about the world, we would be mistaken in changing our reaction. Changing our moral judgments at will would be misguided because it would lead us away from being guided by the facts about the actions. The moral sense theorist’s explanation gets things the wrong way round.⁴⁷ Even if Price over-simplifies his opponents’ position, his criticism is reasonable. Hutcheson does not believe that the moral sense is arbitrary, or that it detects no genuine feature of actions. He believes that it responds to benevolence, and therefore is guided by objective properties of actions. But he does not satisfy Price’s demand for an explanation of why the moral sense picks out benevolence. He cannot say that benevolence really deserves approval, because he cannot say that any quality of the action itself really deserves approval, whether or not it is approved. To deserve approval is to be the subject of a justifying reason, which depends (according to Hutcheson) on the reactions of our moral sense.⁴⁸ Price’s criticism does not refute sentimentalism, but it shows that sentimentalism does not vindicate our moral judgments. Sentimentalists do not show that our moral judgments rest on the grounds that we take them to rest on. They should admit that they reject our moral judgments and they try to replace them with other judgments that will serve some of the purposes of our moral judgments. Though Price (like other rationalists) does not attend as he should to the possibility of this defence of sentimentalism, the defence does not completely answer him. He shows that if we are to become sentimentalists, we must modify our initial view of moral judgments more than the sentimentalist initially acknowledges. If we acknowledge this, we need arguments that justify us in discounting the initial credibility of our moral judgments. We must become justifiably more confident in the soundness of sentimentalist arguments against objective moral properties than we are in the conviction that we are right to approve of benevolence because benevolence is really good. 
- Price believes that an anti-realist about morality faces a further difficulty, because the arguments for anti-realism about moral properties support anti-realism in other areas as well.
Protagoras and other ancient philosophers were right to extend anti-realism from ethics to other areas. This question does not refute anti-realism about moral properties, but it shows that anti-realists may have to pay a higher price than they recognize.
- In arguing that morality is ‘eternal and immutable’ (50), because it is not mutable in relation to our judgments, Price agrees with Cudworth. He improves Cudworth’s argument by showing how his opponent is committed to accepting the consequences of treating actions as being in themselves morally indifferent. He also agrees with Cudworth in taking the objectivity of moral properties to rule out a voluntarist account of morality and will that would make morality consist in divine commands. 
- Price follows Cudworth in rejecting voluntarism about God and morality. Believing that moral rightness is eternal and immutable, he cannot identify it with the content of a positive law made by God or regard it as wholly dependent on God’s will. 
- Price has exploited Cudworth’s arguments for the ‘eternal and immutable’ character of morality to argue against both theological voluntarism and sentimentalism. He relies on theseargumentsto imposegeneral conditionson theadequatedefinition ofamoral property.
    - The first condition emerges from his attack on Locke’s view that rectitude signifies the conformity of actions to rules or laws (of God, or the magistrate, or custom).⁵⁹ Locke’s account implies that it would be absurd to ask whether a law is right; for a law could be right only if it conformed to a second law, about which the same question would arise, leading to an infinite regress.⁶⁰ According to Locke, the question ‘Are the laws right?’ should not be a reasonable question, since rightness simply consists in conformity to law. In this case the question ‘Are the laws wrong?’ should be equally unreasonable. Price answers that both questions are reasonable. He relies on this answer to formulate a general necessary condition for an adequate definition: (C1) If definition D makes right and wrong consist in conformity and non-conformity to F, but it is reasonable to ask ‘Is F itself right or wrong?’, because the answer is not clearly ‘neither’, then D is unacceptable. 
    - A second condition for an adequate definition emerges from Price’s attack on some unacceptable definitions.⁶¹ Whereas the first condition concerned a question raised about the standard of rightness (law etc.), the second concerns a question raised about acting in accordance with the standard. In this case we ask whether it is right (e.g.) to obey a law.
If rightness consisted in obeying a law, it would be absurd to ask whether it is right to obey a law; for that question would simply ask whether obeying a law is obeying a law.
But Price observes that the question is not at all absurd, and that therefore the definition is unacceptable.
He therefore offers a second condition of adequacy: (C2) If definition D defines right action as doing F, but it is reasonable to ask ‘Is doing F right or wrong?’, because the answer is not clearly ‘right’, then D is unacceptable.
    - Here Price imposes a third condition of adequacy on a definition: (C3) If a proposed definition D says that rightness is F-ness, we must be able to understand F-ness independently of understanding rightness. A proper definition must be informative because we understand the definiens independently of the definiendum. According to this condition, rightness may still be indefinable even if many synonymous expressions connect it with other moral properties.⁶⁵ 
- If the two conditions (C1) and (C2) mark two ways in which a definition of a moral property is unacceptable, a definition is acceptable only if questions of the first sort are clearly ill-formed, resting on a misunderstanding, and the answer to questions of the second sort is, as Price says, ‘most trifling’, a near-tautology. If we have found the standard of rightness, the question ‘Is F right?’ should be ill-formed, and ‘Conformity to F is right’ should be as trivially analytic as ‘A brother is a male sibling’. Price objects to proposed definitions by pointing out that some questions are reasonable that ought not to be reasonable if the definitions were correct. We may therefore say that he identifies ‘open questions’. 
- Price deploys both sorts of open question in his argument against Hobbes. He deploys them equally, following Burnet and Balguy, in his rejection of Hutcheson’s appeal to the moral sense. In this case the two questions to be considered are (1) ‘Is the moral sense right or wrong?’, and (2) ‘Is what the moral sense approves of right?’ The first question would not be an open question, if the moral sense theory were right; for the only way to answer it within the moral sense theory would be to appeal to a second moral sense approving of the first one, and then we would face an infinite regress. The first question, then, ought to be ill-formed. The affirmative answer to the second question ought to be trivially analytic.
In Price’s view, however, both questions are open. It is sensible, and not absurd, to say that the moral sense is right or wrong, because we can think of further considerations that would determine whether it is right. Similarly, it is not trivial to say that following the moral sense is right. If it is right to follow the moral sense, that is because following the moral sense meets some further condition for rightness, and we accept the moral sense only to the extent that we think it meets this further condition. 
- Price supports rationalism without naturalism. He follows the lead of William Adams, who rejects Clarke’s appeal to fitnesses. Adams and Price are perhaps influenced by the objections of theological voluntarists who complain that rationalist explanations of fitness are either unhelpfully vague, or misleading (because they imply it is morally wrong to address a French-speaker in English⁶⁷), or collapse into utilitarianism. If the supposed explanation of rightness by fitness is either a bad explanation or a non-explanation, it is better to admit that it is a non-explanation, and that the rationalists were wrong to suppose that the nature of rightness could be explained by appeal to fitness. 
- Adams and Price conclude that we should simply speak of a perception of rightness, without attempting to ground it in knowledge of any other property. No other property can explain rightness in a way that satisfies the voluntarists. In Price’s view, knowledge of rightness is not to be grounded in knowledge of anything else, because rightness is not identical to any other property; no non-synonymous account of the essence of moral rightness can be given. 
- From Price’s point of view, traditional naturalist accounts of rightness and goodness are no less misguided than sentimentalist accounts. If the right cannot be what is approved by the moral sense, it cannot be what accords with rational nature or what is eternally fit.
Price’s position is more extreme than anything that Clarke says. It is difficult to say how far it goes beyond what Clarke means, since Clarke does not offer much explanation of fitness.
But Price implies that Wollaston and Balguy were wrong to try to explain fitness, and he rejects the position of Butler and of traditional naturalism.
This aspect of Price’s position is not completely clear, because of his third condition.
For he might claim that Clarke’s and Butler’s accounts of moral properties do not really raise open questions, because they only offer synonymies, which cannot be understood without understanding the term that is being defined. Clarke and Butler might offer the sort of clarification of moral properties that he thinks possible and desirable. But if this is what he means, his claim about simplicity is true only in a restricted sense, so that moral properties are not definable in simpler terms. They might be complex and definable in many other ways. In Price’s view, appeals to fitness cannot provide a definition of virtue. We need some further account of why it is right to act according to fitness, and then we ‘find ourselves obliged to terminate our views in a simple perception, and something ultimately approved for which no justifying reason can be assigned’ (127). This does not show that rightness is indefinable. Even if explanations cannot be infinitely long, an appeal to fitness may explain something about rightness. We may understand action better, for instance, by treating it as the outcome of belief and desire, even if our account of belief and desire eventually mentions their relation to action. Instead of saying that the account of action is non-explanatory, we should infer that action, belief, and desire are to be understood through one another.
Something similar might be true about fitness, rightness, appropriateness, obligation, and related features of morality. Price’s objection is sound only if appeals to fitness are entirely non-explanatory.To see whether Price is right, we need to distinguish two objections that he might intend:
    - Alleged definitions of moral rightness (etc.) by reference to fitness do not eliminate terms such as ‘ought’ and ‘right’.
    - These alleged definitions do not eliminate moral terms. These two objections are not the same. For even if we cannot explain normative properties by appeal to exclusively non-normative properties (those that can be understood without ‘ought’, ‘right’, ‘good’, and concepts explained through them), we might be able to explain moral normative properties by appeal to non-moral normative properties. Perhaps Clarke and Butler explain the moral through the non-moral, not the normative through the non-normative.
- Similarly, Price does not show that appeals to fitness provide no criterion of virtue (127).
He assumes that the relevant sort of criterion is one that we could appeal to, in a particular case, to resolve a doubt about whether an action is right. He points out that if we cannot see whether an action is right, it will not help us to ask whether it has the relevant sort of fitness, and so he infers that fitness is not a criterion. But that is not the only sort of criterion one might seek. An appeal to fitness might say what makes a right action right, and in this way provide a criterion, even if we cannot use it in a particular case to settle difficulties in moral judgments. 
- Price seems to reject Clarke’s and Butler’s further claim, that we understand moral properties better by appealing to fitness or to naturalness. But his reasons for rejecting this further claim rest on a narrow conception of explanation. Our defence of Clarke and Butler against his objections does not show that they provide an explanation; He might reply that some definitions are informative, because we understand the definiens independently of the definiendum, but they still yield the right trivially analytic consequences that avoid open questions. Perhaps some definitions are of this sort. If we ask the meaning of ‘vixen’ and are told that a vixen is a female fox, we may understand the definiens independently of the definiendum. If we realize that we are being told the meaning of ‘vixen’, we may also realize that it is trivially analytic that a vixen is a female fox. Perhaps this sort of definition of a moral property would satisfy Price, since it would conform to both C2 and C3.
This sort of example, however, does not show that all acceptable definitions satisfy C2 and C3. The example of ‘vixen’ and ‘female fox’ is untypical for two reasons: (i) We assume that the definition is offered to someone who does not grasp the meaning of the word. Here, it is assumed, we have no previous beliefs involving ‘vixen’ that might make us competent users of the word without grasping the definition. (ii) There is nothing to being a vixen beyond being a female fox.⁷⁰ We have no other beliefs about vixens in the light of which we might find ‘This vixen is a female fox’ trivial or non-trivial. Neither feature of the example  applies to proposed definitions of moral properties. In these cases we are not asking to have the word explained to someone who is wholly ignorant of its meaning, and we have many background beliefs against which the consequences of a proposed definition may or may not seem trivial.
In the case of proposed definitions of any properties that differ from our example of ‘vixen’, anything that meets C3 seems to violate C2. If a definition is informative, it must tell us something more than is obvious to a competent user of the term defined. Price thinks it is obvious that if we can use ‘right’, ‘fit’, and so on, we see that they are connected; that is why he denies that a definition that simply exhibits their connexions is satisfactory or informative.
But then any informative definition of them seems to raise an open question. Since we do not already know, for instance, that rightness is what maximizes utility (if we did know that, the definition would be uninformative, a mere synonymy), the proposed definition must surprise us, and it will hardly seem ‘most trifling’ that it is right to maximize utility. In general, until we have thought harder about the meaning of ‘F’, we may be surprised to be told that ‘F’ means ‘G’, and so the question ‘Is F G?’ still seems open. But this hardly shows that F cannot be defined as G.
For this reason, Price’s three conditions exclude so many proposed definitions that they cast doubt on his argument to show that moral properties are indefinable. Apparently we cannot satisfy the demand for both informativeness and triviality at the same time. 
- If Price seeks to raise open semantic questions, we may doubt whether he succeeds.⁷³ A utilitarian might argue that it is absurd to ask whether it is right to maximize utility, but we do not see this if we are surprised to discover that ‘right’ means ‘what maximizes utility’.
Presumably, Price believes that even when we know the meaning of ‘F’ and have got over our surprise at it, there will still be some genuine open questions, and he may argue that ‘Is what maximizes utility right?’ is clearly one of these questions. The utilitarian, however, may answer that we believe the question is open only because we have not considered the meaning of ‘right’ carefully enough. Since there are non-trivial and non-obvious equivalences of meaning, the fact that there is room for dispute does not show that the dispute is not about the meaning of the word.
Suppose, however, that utilitarians concede that Price is right about meaning, and that ‘maximizing utility’ is not the meaning of ‘right’. They might still be right to claim that the property of rightness is the property of maximizing utility, so that maximizing utility is the feature of the world that we refer to when we speak of rightness. Our moral theory tells us that the properties referred to by ‘right’ and by ‘maximizing utility’ are in fact the same. We discover (in Locke’s terms) the real essence of rightness, and we express our discovery in a real definition.
Price’s argument has less force against a proposed real definition than against a proposed nominal definition. Any interesting discoveries of the identity of two properties must rely on facts beyond those that are obvious to those who know the meanings of the words well enough to communicate; otherwise they would not be interesting discoveries, In that case, people who have not learned the relevant facts can raise an apparently open semantic question (e.g., ‘Is the Morning Star really Venus?’ or ‘Is temperature really mean kinetic energy?’). To refute a proposed real definition, he needs to find open moral questions. These are the questions that concern Cudworth. 
- Price’s question is relevant to arguments about concepts, but not necessarily to arguments about properties. 
- To abandon this claim, however, is not to abandon Price’s objections to Hobbes and Hutcheson. These objections show not that moral properties are indefinable, but that they are irreducible to the non-moral properties proposed by Hobbes and Hutcheson. The arguments for irreducibility rest on a proper use of an argument about an open moral question. Cudworth helps us to see the part of Price’s argument that is worth taking seriously after we reject Price’s exaggerated claims. 
- Since we can ask whether we ought to follow, and whether it is right to follow, private or public happiness, Hutcheson’s account of the nature of moral rightness is mistaken.⁷⁹ When we ask whether something is right, we do not take ourselves to be asking what we feel favourable towards. The latter question is answered by a report on our feelings and reactions at the time; but the question we are asking seeks a reason for forming our reactions one way or another.
Thisapplication ofPrice’sopen question argument presentsafairobjection to Hutcheson’s theory.ItusesHutcheson’sobjectiontoatheologicalvoluntaristaccountofmoralrightness.⁸⁰ The objection is not decisive. It shows that the meaning of the question ‘What is right?’ is not ‘How do we react to this or that course of action?’, so that a reference to the moral sense does not tell us the meaning of the question. But Hutcheson might still maintain that in fact we are simply consulting our moral sense, though our question suggests that we are doing something else. objection, therefore, forces sentimentalists to present their theory of moral properties and moral judgments as an ‘error theory’. They must argue that Price’s question results from an error about the nature and capacity of moral judgment and about the character of moral properties. If they frankly present their theory in this light, his arguments do not refute it. Still, his objections have some force. For if Hutcheson must revise our normal views about the character of our moral judgments in this way, we may ask whether the revision is reasonable. The revision must be extensive. If we think we can sometimes have good reason to believe that our moral sense ought to be stronger than it is, or that we ought to listen to it more often than we do, our judgments do not seem to fit Hutcheson’s view; for it is not clear that they are simply reactions of the moral sense. Hutcheson might say that these judgments rest on an illusion, because no reasons support our judgment about what is right or obligatory, apart from the reactions of our moral sense. But if he says this, he must agree that some of our moral judgments are simply mistaken. He cannot offer any interpretation that makes them true. Price’s question forces Hutcheson to admit that he is offering to replace moral judgment with something else, rather than giving an account of our actual moral judgments. Price’s open question argument is legitimate, if it is applied without Price’s exaggerations.
- Price’s examination of our attitude to moral character develops a further argument against a sentimentalist account of moral judgment. If Hutcheson’s moral sense theory is right, our approval of the character of others consists in a favourable reaction by our moral sense to their benevolence.⁸² Price argues that this account of approval leaves out an essential element in moral evaluation of a person. He agrees with Shaftesbury and Butler in claiming that we expect reflexion and rational choice in the genuinely virtuous person.⁸³ Merely instinctive benevolence, separated from any rational conviction of the value of benevolent action, is not the proper object of moral esteem.⁸⁴ Price does not discuss over-determined actions, where both our rational reflexion on what is right and our instinctive benevolence seem to be sufficient to move us to action, so that rational reflexion would have caused us to act even if the instinctive benevolence had not. It is not clear that the presence of instinctive benevolence subtracts moral worth from the action.⁸⁵ Still, Price’s main point is plausible. If the moral sense theory were right, disinterested favourable feeling towards another person’s benevolent feeling would be moral approval of the other person’s character. But Price points out that we draw a distinction between these two ways of looking at another person; character requires more than simple benevolent feeling.⁸⁶ Hutcheson’s moral sense theory does not give the right account of our conception of moral worth or moral approval.⁸⁷ If Hutcheson recognized this, he would have to answer that we are mistaken to suppose we can draw Price’s distinction. 
- According to the sentimentalist, ‘obligation’ refers to a psychological state; I have an obligation to do x when I have a motive sufficient for me to do x or at least causing me to tend to do x. Balguy the rationalist follows the sentimentalists in accepting a subjective account of obligation as ‘a state of the mind into which it is brought by perceiving a reason for action’ (114).⁸⁹ Price rejects this and all other psychological definitions on the ground that they do not distinguish the objective basis of the feeling of obligation from the feeling itself, and they do not recognize that the obligation is the objective basis, not the feeling.⁹⁰ A true moral judgment, in Price’s view, recognizes an obligation that is already there whether or not we recognize it; that is the difference between a genuine obligation and something that we feel like doing or even feel compelled to do.⁹¹ If genuine recognition of obligation essentially recognizes something other than our belief and feeling as a ground for our action, a purely psychological account of obligation is wrong. The state of mind that belongs to obligation should include a characteristic feeling that results from recognition of an obligation that is not a state of mind. Both obligation and the feeling of obligation are unintelligible unless we recognize that the obligation is the basis of the feeling.
The objective conception of obligation conflicts both with sentimentalism and with the legislative conception accepted by voluntarists. According to voluntarists, ‘obligation’ explains ‘right’, ‘wrong’, ‘duty’, and so on. All of these other moral concepts include a reference to obligation—as Price agrees—and obligation refers to legal imposition. Price rejects this direction of explanation; rightness consists wholly in facts about objective properties of things that are independent of the will of any legislator. Though obligatoriness and rightness imply some law binding us to do what is obligatory and right, this law does not require any legislator. The law results simply from the fact that some things are right, and that therefore we ought to do them.⁹²
- Price does not accept—or even consider—the option defended by Suarez, confining obligation to legislation and allowing intrinsic rightness and wrongness without obligation.
This option tries to explain why the voluntarist position seems plausible, by allowing that legislation introduces a distinct type of moral requirement. But its recognition of intrinsic rightness agrees with Price on the basic issue.
- According to Hutcheson, ‘a person is obliged to an action, when every spectator, or he himself upon reflexion, must approve his action and disapprove omitting it’ (116). Price replies that the obligation is what we recognize as the basis of our approval of an action; it is not the approval itself.⁹ 
- He asserts an internal connexion between knowledge of an obligation to do x and being moved to do x, not between the existence of the obligation to do x and being moved to do x. 
- We might still wonder, however, whether any account of this characteristic could be acceptable within Price’s account of the ‘idea’ of rightness. For if he has shown that our concept of rightness is a concept of something simple and indefinable, how could we show that any definable characteristic is right-making? Our only constraint on the identification of the right-making characteristic is that it must make something have the simple and indefinable property of rightness. But if the resulting property is simple and indefinable, why should we believe that one characteristic rather than another causes, makes, or constitutes it? From this point of view, neither utilitarianism nor any other normative theory seems to satisfy Price’s constraints.
This argument overlooks the restrictions on Price’s claim that rightness is simple and indefinable. He denies that rightness can be analysed into simpler, independently understood elements that would allow a reductive definition. Though he rejects such an analysis, he allows that we can describe rightness informatively, and that we can connect it with other properties. All these descriptions and connexions give us ‘synonymous descriptions’ rather than genuine definitions, but they embody necessary truths about rightness. Such descriptions, therefore, may tell us enough about rightness to allow a decision about whether utilitarianism or some other normative theory is correct. Price’s claim about simplicity does not disqualify all attempts at normative theory. 
- Price does not refute the utilitarian case if he simply observes that we do not consciously think in utilitarian terms. Utilitarians need not attribute explicit utilitarian reasoning to us;
but they must argue that we care about utilitarian considerations enough to adapt our moral judgments to them. We answer this utilitarian claim if we show that we would still see moral reasons for acting as we do if we were convinced that no utilitarian defence of our action could be given. These moral reasons may not always be overriding, if utilitarian considerations also contribute to overall rightness. But they refute a utilitarian account of rightness.
Price applies this counterfactual test against utilitarianism. We are often quite unsure about the effects of a particular action or rule on overall utility, but our uncertainty may not make us uncertain about whether it is right or wrong. One of his examples concerns the role of desert in distribution of benefits. In his view, ‘vice is of essential demerit; and virtue is of itself rewardable’ (81). We have some bias in favour of distributing benefits to the worthy and not to the unworthy, and we take this to be right. Price does not deny that beneficial effects are relevant to distribution; but he argues that they are not the only things that matter. We would still favour distribution according to merit even if we did not consider the utilitarian effects.¹¹³ 
- Price’s argument does not rely on his questionable views about the force of open semantic questions.¹¹⁴ He does not argue simply that there would be no contradiction in supposing an action right but non-optimific. He argues for the stronger claim that a judgment about an action’s being optimific does not settle the question about its rightness; other features of it besides its tendency to promote utility are relevant to its being right or wrong.
In this case, then, Price relies on an open moral question against utilitarianism. Though he appeals to our judgments about what is certain and uncertain, he does not confuse epistemic with explanatory reasons. If rightness is the tendency to promote utility, an enlightened person’s certainty or uncertainty about the tendency of an action to promote utility should produce corresponding certainty or uncertainty about whether the action is right.
Should this argument move utilitarians? Admittedly, they need not be moved by the fact that our tendency to believe an action right may persist despite doubts about its tendency to promote utility. Still, they must agree that if we are rational, and take account of our doubts about utility, our conviction about rightness ought to be weakened also. If, then, our convictions about rightness do not change in the way that they would change if we were utilitarians, our moral judgments do not support utilitarianism. 
- according to the indirect utilitarian, if we are enlightened about the basis of moral rules (or motives, or traits of character), our attachment to them depends on some conviction about their effects on utility. If Price is right, this utilitarian claim is mistaken. 
- A utilitarian who agreed with Price so far might argue that any attachment that is independent of utilitarian defences of a moral rule is irrational. Price denies this, but his denial is less convincing given his intuitionist account of moral judgment. For it might seem difficult to distinguish the intuitive and correct conviction of the rightness of non-utilitarian rules from an irrational attachment to them; on Price’s view, we can give no further account of what we find rationally compelling about different types of right action.
He might argue, however, that if this is a difficulty for him, it is a difficulty for the utilitarian as well, since we have a good reason to accept the utilitarian principle only if we have an intuition of its rightness. If the utilitarian has to allow one principle grasped by intuition, why not accept the apparent fact that several principles, rather than just one principle, are intuitively compelling? Similarly, if we appeal not to rational intuition, but to what is immediately approved of by a moral sense, we have no reason to claim that our moral sense reacts only to benevolence and utility, and not to several irreducibly different features of right actions and of virtuous people (137).¹¹⁵ We might be able to resolve this dispute between monism and pluralism about ultimate principles if we could find a rational basis for accepting utilitarian or non-utilitarian principles, and could show that they do not rest simply on intuition without further support. But we could exploit this possibility only if we revised Price’s moral epistemology. 
- In Price’s view, we need intuition about ultimate moral principles, just as we need it about all ultimate principles.¹²⁰ He believes that an appeal to intuition is not a peculiar feature of his normative outlook, but a necessary feature of any normative outlook that seeks to trace its claims about the rightness and wrongness of specific actions to ultimate principles.¹²¹ If it is not a reasonable option to reject intuitionism, it is not a reasonable option to question it simply because it leads to pluralism. We must simply recognize several moral principles and virtues that all rest on equally self-evident foundations, and we must resist any attempt to reduce them to one set of principles. As Price recognizes, this position requires us to admit the possibility of moral conflicts and dilemmas, where the requirements of two virtues cannot both be satisfied in the same situation. 
- Balguy and Price see morally-sceptical tendencies in sentimentalism.












#                  Difficulties 

- Whewell’s attitude to Price is over-simplified. Both of them tend to represent the rationalism of Clarke and Balguy as the only reasonable alternative to Hume. Neither of them clearly recognizes that Butler offers a significant option distinct both from Clarke’s rationalism and from sentimentalism. Price takes himself to maintain the position of Butler against the errors of Shaftesbury and Hutcheson. He does not discuss the significant differences between himself and Butler.⁵ Still, Price’s statement of a rationalist position is fuller and better defended than Clarke’s and Balguy’s. Price and Reid help us to understand what can be done for rationalism without traditional naturalism.⁶
- If the greatest pleasure is pleasure taken in the greatest non-instrumental good, we do not refute Plato’s claim that virtue promotes the greatest pleasure if we show that the virtuous person does not gain the greatest pleasure, as the non-virtuous person would estimate it. Price’s criticism of eudaemonism seems not to take account of the complications resulting from his view of pleasure and its objects. On this point he disagrees with Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, who all claim that virtue is profitable precisely because they think it is to be chosen for its own sake. They take the good for an agent to include both the useful (utile, commodum) and the morally good (honestum). This connexion between the honestum and the good is especially clear in Suarez’s discussion. Price does not recognize this feature of some eudaemonist views. He seems to make Scotus’ mistake of supposing that in aiming at our good, we must aim at advantage, understood as a good that belongs exclusively to the agent.¹⁸ 
- According to Sidgwick, Butler sees the distinction between prudence and morality that is obscured by Greek moralists.¹⁹ But he agrees with eudaemonists in arguing for the harmony of conscience and self-love. Since Butler accepts a hedonist conception of happiness, he apparently ought to accept the fairly simple observations that Price uses to show that there is no reason to expect a general coincidence between virtue and pleasure; hence, apparently, Butler ought to admit that the same observations undermine any claim about the coincidence between virtue and happiness.
Perhaps, however, we ought not to draw this conclusion from Price and Butler. Instead of concluding that Butler should agree with Price in rejecting the harmony of conscience and self-love, perhaps we ought to conclude that both Butler and Price should reject a hedonist conception of happiness. If they pursued the implications of their views about pleasure and goodness, they would have good reason to agree with Butler, against Price, on the harmony of conscience and self-love.
- Price applies this general claim to the particular case of happiness. To show that our pursuit of happiness is not simply the product of instinct (in his sense), he argues that a being ‘purely reasonable . . . would not want [i.e., lack] all principles of action, and all inclinations’ (70–1). In fact ‘the nature of happiness also would engage him to choose and desire it for himself ’ (71). It is as evident that happiness is better than misery as it is that a whole is greater than one of its parts.²⁹ No prior desire for happiness explains why a rational agent pursues happiness; the mere knowledge of what happiness is moves us by itself to pursue it.³⁰ Price’s comparison of ‘happiness is better than misery’ to ‘the whole is greater than one of its parts’ does not really clarify his position. The statement about whole and parts is analytic; we will assent to it as soon as we know the meaning of ‘whole’ and ‘part’. The statement about happiness, however, does not seem to be analytic (especially if we accept Price’s conception of happiness); and even if it were, Price would not have explained why the belief that something is better for us should be supposed to move us to action by itself.
One might reply that the belief that something is good for us will move us if we are rational agents; this is part of what it is to be a rational agent. This reply might not secure Price’s main point, however. If we are rational agents, our desires are responsive to considerations of relative importance and coherence; this order in an agent’s desires constitutes, in Aquinas’ view, a desire for happiness. It is not clear, then, that Price avoids the ascription of desire to a rational agent who is moved by considerations of what is best. Though the desire for one’s own good is not an instinct, it does not follow that the belief that something is good for us moves us by itself. Still, part of Price’s position may be defensible; for he would be justified in claiming that, even if we acknowledge the necessity of desire for action, desire does not explain why we act on the belief that something is worth pursuing. Our having a desire to pursue what is worth pursuing simply follows from the fact that we act on this sort of belief.³¹
- It is unfortunate that Price comes no closer than Cudworth comes to identifying the crucial errors in the Hobbesian doctrine of necessity. Cudworth’s emphasis on the importance of rational motives raises doubts about Hobbes’s and Hume’s version of compatibilism, since they allow any sort of motive to be equally sufficient for the relevant sort of freedom. Price ought to agree with Cudworth on this point, given the rest of his rationalist view; but he does not make his position clear. 
- We may reasonably doubt his conditions, once we apply both the second and the third to a proposed definition. C2 tells us that if rightness is correctly defined as F-ness, then ‘F is right’ is trivially analytic and does not raise an open question. But C3 tells us that the correct definition of rightness as F-ness would have to be informative, not a mere synonymy in which our understanding of F-ness presupposes some understanding of rightness. We might suspect that any definition meeting the demand for informativeness and independent understanding of the definiens will thereby fail to meet the demand for trivial analyticity that leaves no open question. If this suspicion is correct, Price’s conditions for definition are mistaken, since they imply that nothing can be defined. 
- Is the open moral question any more useful than the open semantic question? It may appear to provide a less readily applicable test than the test Price offers, and its application may appear to be more controversial. This is not clear, however. Price’s test for a definition appeals to judgments about self-contradiction and tautology; but these judgments may be controversial, and if we insist on finding uncontroversial tautologies and self-contradictions, we will find it difficult to accept many definitions. By contrast, the open moral question seems to yield plausible results in some cases. If we have some basis for judging that F actions are right or wrong, besides the fact that they are F, F-ness cannot be moral rightness. 
- He ought, therefore, to drop C2; he ought not to require an acceptable definition to yield trivially analytic truths of the sort he considers.
He ought also to drop C3; its demand for independent understanding of the definiens seems too strict. He is right to say that if we understand F simply through G and G simply through F, neither helps us to understand the other. But not all circles of understanding need be so small. We may come to understand ‘right’ better when we grasp its connexions to ‘ought’, ‘obligation’, ‘duty’, ‘fitness’, and so on. 
- C3 is even less plausible for real definitions. To apply C3 to moral properties is to insist that a moral property is definable if and only if it is reducible to some non-moral property that has precisely the explanatory role that we attribute to the moral property. This is a very strong reductive claim. We ought not to accept such a condition for specifying the nature of any genuine moral property; and so we have no reason to accept C3 as an appropriate condition on definitions of moral properties. Price does not show, therefore, that moral ideas or moral properties are simple and indefinable. His arguments for this claim rest on his questionable conditions for definition.
- But without some further premisses about the connexion between the recognition of reasons and the presence of motives the move from reasons to motives is open to dispute. In clarifying the internal connexion between recognized obligation and motivation, Price claims that being moved by moral considerations is part of being a ‘reasonable being’.¹⁰² the obligation does not consist simply in the consciousness of obligation; the point is that we have an obligation (distinct from our consciousness) to follow our consciousness of obligation. These remarks, therefore, suggest a connexion between morality, being a reasonable agent, and motivation. If Price intends this sort of connexion, he does not imply either that recognition of obligation motivates independently of desire, or that it includes a desire.
He claims only that our being reasonable agents includes having motives that make us susceptible to moral obligations.
If this is Price’s view, he does not even imply that every reasonable agent always acts on the recognition of obligation. In his view, no further motive besides those implied in reasonable agency is needed to explain why we act on moral obligations. Some failure of reasonable agency underlies failure to act on moral obligations. But since Price does not believe that every reasonable agent always acts reasonably, he allows that we may fail to act on recognized moral obligations. But he rejects Hume’s claim that a person’s reasonableness is independent of their acting on moral obligations. His position reflects a dispute with Hume about what can be attributed to practical reason. Price does not pursue this question further. Since he does not say what feature of rational agency implies a disposition to act on moral considerations, he does not dispel the suspicion that his claim is either trivial or mysterious. His claim is trivial if it says no more than that ‘rational’ means ‘disposed to be moved by moral considerations’. This account of the meaning of the term is eccentric, and it does not tell us how rational agents are moved by morality. If he claims that ‘rational’ means ‘moved simply by the belief that something is morally required’, he tells us something about how a rational agent is moved, but he does not convince us that there are any rational agents in this special sense. His claim is obscure, however,ifitmeansthatrationalagents,asweordinarilyunderstandthem,aremovedsimply by the thought of moral obligation all by itself. This claim suggests that recognition of moral considerations has some capacity to move us, but throws no light on what the capacity is. 
- Price would remove the appearance of triviality or obscurity if he could present a plausible account of rational agency that did not assume that a rational agent is moved by morality, and if he could then present a plausible account of morality that showed how it would move a rational agent of the sort previously described. The argument might proceed in these stages: (1) A rational agent (as we can see without relying wholly on our views about moral motivation) must be moved by a characteristic reason. (2) Morality (as we can see by appeal to moral judgments, not simply by appeal to our conception of rationality) appeals to this same characteristic reason. (3) Hence a rational agent must be moved by morality. For his excessive use of the open question argument leaves no room for a clear account of the reason that is characteristic of morality; and so it is not clear what necessary aspect of rational agency corresponds to a necessary aspect of moral obligation. Price’s moral epistemology seems to interfere with his argument about moral motivation.
He does not leave us completely at a loss, however. For though his normative theory is influenced by his epistemological intuitionism, it identifies some characteristics of the moral attitude. In particular, he emphasizes the implicit impartiality and reciprocity of moral principles. Could some account of rational agency show that a rational agent must be moved by principles embodying the appropriate sort of impartiality and reciprocity? Recognition of the gaps in Price’s theory might lead us towards a theory such as Kant’s. 
- Vice has to be explained differently; for it does not seem so obvious that in this case we know that the virtuous action we reject rests on stronger considerations. Nonetheless, Price speaks of comparative strength in this case too.¹⁰⁶ The vicious person is not simply the victim of overwhelmingly strong desires. On the contrary, he is all the more vicious because he does not act under the influence of overwhelming influences; he seems to choose deliberately not to follow the moral obligation that he recognizes. But what sort of choice can this be, given Price’s account of the moral motive? If the vicious person compares his obligations with his immoral preferences, on what basis does he compare them? Price does not say.
- Though ultimate principles of right must be grasped by intuition, the properties that make actions right may well be complex, and reasoning may be needed to decide whether specific actions have these properties. Intuition tells us that fair and impartial actions are right, but we may need more than intuition to know which actions are fair and impartial.
- He would have a much stronger case if he were to argue that the reasons that require us to regard justice as a virtue also require us (say) to regard generosity and temperance as virtues. In that case it would be clear that someone who did not recognize generosity and temperance as virtues would be failing to grasp something essential to justice as well, and might well be said to lack knowledge of it. But this argument suggests that there is some further property that makes all these virtues right and obligatory—something further that should be identified with their rightness. Once we try to say what this feature is, we will have great difficulty in showing that it does not raise the sort of open question that Price takes to refute other attempted accounts of rightness.
Once again Price’s intuitionism seems to interfere with a reasonable argument that he offers. Price is rightly concerned to avoid the premature reduction of all moral rightness to utility. But it would be equally premature to suppose that his frequent appeals to intuition are the only reasonable alternative to utilitarianism. 
- Butler argues that self-love and conscience are independent principles, and that conscience is superior to self-love, even though they almost always coincide. We have seen that Butler’s positionmay beattackedfromtwodifferent directions:(1) Onemight argueagainst himfrom a eudaemonist point of view; his argument for the distinctness of self-love and conscience relies on the restricted conception of self-love that results from identifying happiness with pleasure. (2) One might argue that he concedes too much to eudaemonism in arguing that self-love and conscience agree; for the account of self-love that separates conscience from self-love also seems to undermine arguments for the agreement of the two principles.
Price rejects the first objection to Butler, but endorses the second, since he argues against Butler’s belief in the general agreement of the two principles. His argument depends on identifying happiness with pleasure, and perhaps even on identifying it with selfish pleasure;
he does not take account of the sort of argument that, for instance, Plato offers in the Republic. 
- Price and Reid object to the sentimentalist account of moral judgments. They argue that our common understanding of moral judgments treats them as rational judgments, and not as reports or expressions of our feelings of approval. But they do not explain as clearly what is rational about moral judgments, or how their rationality can be shown.⁶ 