- He is natural law moralist
- Pufendorf attacks on appeals to natural desire for sociability 
- Morality depends on natural law, and hence on Divine commands, and that the natural foundation of morality consists in natural, but non-moral, goodness and badness.
- He critiques Hobbes
- the non-moral natural goods are simply those that promote one’s own advantage 
- the confusion creates spurious support for a legislative conception of morality.
- Even Hobbes, who goes furthest in a voluntarist direction, believes that what fits human nature is independent of God’s legislative will; that is why the laws of nature are counsels of self-preservation. But Hobbes does not believe that God commands obedience to these natural laws because they preserve human society; the commands are not an exercise of God’s benevolence or of God’s care for creation, but of God’s power. Culverwell, Locke, Cumberland, and Pufendorf reject this part of Hobbes’s view; they agree that in some way God necessarily chooses to command observance of the natural law that preserves human society. On this point they agree with Suarez. They differ from Suarez, and from one another, in their views about whether the element of natural law that is independent of command and will is also morality. None of them defends Suarez’s combination of naturalism (about right and wrong) and voluntarism (about obligation and law).
- He abandon Culverwell’s unsatisfactory compromise that we cannot recognise intrinsic rightness without recognising a requirement (debitum). He prefers a more thoroughly voluntarist position that rejects intrinsic rightness. 
- without a divine command some courses of action are unreasonable, and others are rationally appropriate, but no action is morally right or wrong because none is obligatory
- Hobbes, Cumberland, and Pufendorf all reject intrinsic rightness. Pufendorf rejects the naturalist position that he ascribes to Grotius. He rejects intrinsic rightness, and claims that whatever is right is right only because it is imposed by divine command. On this point he agrees with Cumberland (whom he cites). But he departs further than Cumberland departs from Grotius and the Scholastic position, by rejecting Grotius’ use of natural sociality as a basis for the evaluation of political society. In rejecting these two elements of Grotius’ position Pufendorf comes closer to Hobbes’s view. He disagrees with Hobbes in believing that moral rightness is irreducible to advantage, and therefore is imposed by divine law. But he follows Hobbes in denying that natural properties include any intrinsic moral rightness that is irreducible to advantage.
- Pufendorf also agrees with Hobbes in rejecting Grotius’ belief in natural sociality as the basis of a commonwealth. To show that the only legitimate moral demand on a commonwealth is the requirement to preserve peace, and that we need a commonwealth in order to preserve peace, he disagrees with Aristotle, the Stoics, the Scholastics, and Grotius. According to these defenders of natural sociality, facts about human nature itself, and not simply about competition, aggression, and self-preservation, make political life appropriate for human beings.
- Pufendorf affrims voluntarism as part of his argument about ‘the certainty of the disciplines that deal with morals’ ( JNG i 2).² He rejects the view of (allegedly) most of his predecessors, who are misled by Aristotle into believing that moral science is necessarily uncertain. In his view, it is capable of demonstration.³ Moral entities are imposed by God, but we do not rely on any special revelation of the divine will to know about them.⁴ Natural law is natural in the epistemological sense, since we know its requirements innately. But it is not natural in the metaphysical sense; it consists essentially in divine commands, not in facts about our nature. The certainty of moral principles is secured by the fact that they are imposed by a wise and benevolent God in view of the needs resulting from the human condition.⁵ In this statement of his position Pufendorf does not simply affirm that the natural law depends on the legislative will of God. On this issue Suarez and Pufendorf agree against the naturalist view of Vasquez (perhaps followed by Grotius). Suarez believes that the aspect of the natural law that creates ‘obligation’ (as Suarez understands it) depends on divine commands. Pufendorf’s denial of any right and wrong independent of God’s legislative will goes further than Suarez goes in the direction of voluntarism; he rejects Suarez’s and Grotius’ belief in intrinsic rightness and wrongness (honestas and turpitudo) apart from any imposition.
- Suarez derives morality from natural goodness and badness, so that rightness and wrongness are properties of actions promoting or harming the common good of rational agents. Suarez, therefore, takes divine commands to be necessary for natural law, but not for moral rightness. Pufendorf takes them to be necessary for moral rightness as well. 
- Some of Pufendorf’s arguments, however, go beyond the claim that creation implies dependence on the divine will. He allows that some properties belong to nature apart from divine ‘imposition’, and argues that moral properties are not among them. The properties that he takes not to be imposed are the result of creation; hence imposition implies some further act of the divine will beyond creation. Here he recognizes the distinction between creation and legislation, even though he overlooked it in accusing naturalists of recognizing a principle independent of God and of restricting divine freedom. To separate natural from imposed properties, Pufendorf distinguishes nature itself from the further properties imposed on nature by the divine will. He argues that nature itself consists simply in bodies in motion, and their effects on one another. No morality can be found simply in movement, and application of physical power; hence rightness and wrongness do not belong to nature in itself, but are imposed. Natural properties are the ones that is recognised by physical sciences. Since right and wrong are not among these properties, they do not belong to nature in itself, and therefore they are imposed. 
- He agrees that the properties defniing natural beneft iand harm to human beings precede divine legislation. Natural goodness is distinct from moral goodness (as Cumberland argues¹⁷), and natural goodness is not imposed.¹⁸ From the creation of human beings it follows that certain things are naturally good and bad for them. Hence ‘prudential properties’ (concerned with benefti and harm to oneself) belong to nature and are not imposed on it. 
- Moral goodness differs from non-moral goodness because morality is imposed on some human actions through law (i 2.6). God’s creation of us makes certain actions expedient or inexpedient for us, given our nature, but not thereby right or wrong. We cannot derive morality from our nature as rational animals; for if we consider reason without reference to law and moral norm (legis seu normae moralis), it is simply more efficient in supplying our natural needs. If we try to find what is fitting for rational nature, we simply find that instrumental reasoning is fitting, and this has nothing to do with morality. Hence the Scholastic claim that morality consists in what is fitting for rational nature is mistaken. Until we take account of law, we cannot find morality in human actions any more than the blind can see colour
- Pufendorf agrees with naturalists about the content of morality, insofar as he derives its provisions from facts about humann atureand what is harmful or benefciial to it. But he denies that these facts alone constitute morality. To explain where a naturalist account of moral properties fails, he asserts (two claims that undermine each other. Refelxion on Vasquez and Suarez suggests that the best argument for accepting either of them is an equally good argument for rejecting the other. ): 
    - The relevant deontic concepts—right, wrong, duty, and so on—presuppose some reference to a norm and a law. Pufendorf does not defend himself on this point, but his claim needs defence. To say that right and wrong (honestum, turpe) presuppose some norm (norma) or (as Suarez puts it) some rule (regula) is plausible. But to assert without argument that this rule must be a law is to overlook a distinction that Suarez maintains.  
    - A law requires a command by a superior. On the second point, he follows Suarez. But on the first point he follows Selden against Suarez. If we accept Pufendorf’s previous point, so understood, we will not immediately accept his second point. For if we take ‘law’, ‘norm’, ‘right’ (ius), and ‘rule’ to be equivalent, we agree with Aquinas’ view (sometimes) that none of these requires any command by a superior. If we ignore the broad use of ‘law’, and so concede Pufendorf’s second point, the issue turns on Suarez’s naturalist claim about rightness and wrongness, also accepted by Grotius. According to Suarez, actions are right and wrong, and we have a duty to perform and omit them, because of their own nature (in relation to rational beings), apart from any law. Pufendorf disagrees; even if we do not rely on any human law in regarding actions as right and wrong, we nonetheless (in his view) rely on a divine law. Why should we agree with Pufendorf on this point? Against his view Suarez claims that God imposes the natural law only by commanding actions that are right and wrong in themselves. The counterfactual supposition used by Gregory of Rimini, Suarez, and Grotius to show that we would recognize intrinsic morality apart from beliefs about the existence of God or God’s concern for human good and harm raises a reasonable doubt about Pufendorf’s legislative thesis. 
    - Pufendorf takes a step towards naturalism, by maintaining that moral principles require only those actions that are already required by our natural good. In prescribing morality, divine law prescribes actions that we can already see reason to do.
    - Since he agrees with all of them that the content of morality is determined by natural good, and he holds Hobbes’s narrow view of the content of natural good, he also holds Hobbes’s view that morality consists only of principles prescribing what is advantageous for the sake of peace. He does not allow that the honestum is part of the natural good antecedent to divine commands. But he believes, against Hobbes and with Suarez and Grotius, that moral properties are irreducible to natural advantage. Since he disagrees with the naturalist account of how this is so, he must give a different account. His account relies on assumptions about reasons or about motivation: Though the advantage of following a dictate of natural good is clear, human beings will act against this dictate if they are induced to act against advantage, or if they think they see greater advantage in acting some other way. A dictate of natural good acquires the necessary binding force only from the will of God. Pufendorf agrees, therefore, with Hobbes about the content of morality, but not about its essential motive. He believes that the Hobbesian motive of self-preservation is insufficient for morality. He argues: (a) Calculation of advantage is not the appropriate basis for morally good action. (b) Hence, consideration of natural good is not the appropriate basis for morally good action. (c) The only appropriate basis comes from divine law. 
- According to Pufendorf, all the facts about nature that Suarez takes to be moral facts are simply facts about mutual advantage; moral facts require the addition of divine commands. 
-These voluntarist answers, however, do not seem to be open to Pufendorf. For he rejects the Ockhamist view, and prefers the account of divine freedom that Cajetan and Suarez maintain in defence of naturalism. He argues that, while God was free to create or not to create human beings, he could not both have created them and imposed a different natural law on them; the Ockhamist supposition ‘clearly involves a contradiction’.⁵² 
- In taking sociality to be a central aspect of human nature, apart from any society, Pufendorf departs consciously from one of Hobbes’s basic assumptions. In Hobbes’s view, if we do not presuppose a government that secures peace for us, the rule of self-preservation has absolute priority, and no other aspect of human nature has any practical standing except insofar as it promotes self-preservation. Self-preservation is the ultimate and dominant end; in this respect, it corresponds to happiness, as Aristotle and Aquinas conceive it. Since Hobbes rejects the Aristotelian view that the ultimate end includes more than self-preservation, the other laws of nature oblige only in foro interno in the state of nature. 
- Pufendorf agrees with Cumberland in rejecting this view about human nature in the state of nature.⁶¹ Human beings are not only naturally concerned for their own safety, but also naturally social; hence other principles besides self-preservation have moral standing in the state of nature. As Clarke sees, this does not imply that we are required to neglect self-preservation in the state of nature; but it implies that we are required to act on social principles even if they do not promote self-preservation, as long as they do not undermine it.⁶² Pufendorf takes the neglect of natural sociality to be one of Hobbes’s major errors about the state of nature. He therefore rejects, as Grotius does, the argument of Carneades seeking to prove that utility is the origin of justice
- Pufendorf takes a further step away from the aspects of naturalism that disturb Hobbes. He believes that human beings are naturally social, and therefore he recognizes a natural basis for communities, but he halts any appeal to social human nature when he reaches civil society. Though human beings are naturally social, they are not naturally political.⁶⁸ Hence we cannot justify or understand or criticize political society by considering how well or badly it fulfils the natural sociality of human beings. The social aspect of human nature can only justify smaller communities, such as families, voluntary associations, and so on. It cannot be used to justify civil society. 
- He takes the function of the state to be limited by the demands of security, which is needed to remedy the evils that result from the blind impulses of individuals in the state of nature.⁷⁰ The provision of security against these evils is the only function of the state; no further basis for evaluation or criticism of a state is recognized. By abandoning the critical aspects of naturalism, Pufendorf avoids Hobbes’s criticisms of appeals to nature. 
- Pufendorf claims to avoid a Hobbesian conception of the state of nature by arguing that moral requirements are not, as Hobbes supposes, obligations imposed by a state, but obligations imposed by God. The state of nature is a state in which we have no superior, but, since God always commands obedience to the moral law, we are never in a state of nature. We may pass over questions about whether Pufendorf and Leibniz give a fair account of Hobbes’s position. 








#                  Difficulties

- Pufendorf’s mistake of assuming that insofar as God created beings who have moral duties to God (as God the Creator), God is the legislator who creates obligations by legislation.
- Pufendorf argues, that morality requires laws, and therefore requires a lawgiver; but that argument still leaves open questions about why we ought to obey the lawgiver.
- - InPufendorf’sview,naturalistsbelieveinsomeprincipleindependentof,andco-eternalwith, God, restricting God’s freedom, because they believe in natural rightness and wrongness apart from God’s will. Their position is theologically unsound, since God created us by the exercise of free will, and God was free to do otherwise than create us with this nature. Nothing can be good or bad by intrinsic necessity, apart from the pleasure and the imposition of God.⁸ When we speak of natural rightness and wrongness, we do not refer to anything independent of the will of God; we simply refer to what is required by the natural condition that the Creator has freely given to us.⁹ Human beings with their nature are creatures of God, and so the nature of right actions depends on God’s will as creator.¹⁰ A naturalist position makes the existence of human beings with their nature independent of God’s will as creator, but Grotius has overlooked this unwelcome result of naturalism. The view that Pufendorf attributes to naturalism is more extreme than the view of mediaeval naturalists, Suarez and Grotius. All of these naturalists distinguish the creative from the legislative will of God.
- Even if the existence of human beings for whom justice is good depends on the divine will, it does not follow that the fact that their good requires justice also depends on the divine will. Naturalists are right to argue that Christian doctrines about creation do not affect their claims about the independence of morality.¹³ If, therefore, Pufendorf simply asserts that created things depend on God’s creative will and indicative law, he has not refuted the naturalism of Suarez and Grotius.
- Remarks about the natural and non-imposed character of prudential properties cast doubt on the argument to show that moral properties are imposed. For since prudential properties are natural, but are not explicitly recognized in a physicist’s description of matter in motion, the absence of moral properties from such a description does not show that moral properties are imposed and not natural. 
- Giving a cup of water to an innocent person dying of thirst is benefciial to a human being and has natural goodness, but it is morally indifferent unless someone has legislated it. To show that natural goodness is not sufficient for moral goodness, Pufendorf observes that actions may be naturally good even if they are not voluntary, and even if they are not done by human beings at all; no such actions are morally good. This observation, however, does not support Pufendorf’s legislative thesis. We may well agree that moral goodness and badness in actions requires not only the appropriate property in the action itself, but also the appropriate property in the agent. Since the human good is the good of a rational agent, it is intelligible that the actions that primarily promote this good are voluntary actions for which the agent is appropriately held responsible. Moreover, the fact that we are rational and responsible agents makes it possible for us to be obliged to action by legislation. None of this implies that actions can be morally good only if a legislator has prescribed them.
- Pufendorf defends his legislative view by arguing that naturalism is inconsistent. If we were to recognize intrinsic morality antecedent to any law, we would be committed, in his view, to these inconsistent claims: (1) All obligation is imposed by a superior. (2) If A’s action is morally good or evil, A is obliged to do or refrain from the action.²⁷ (3) Actions are morally good or evil apart from legislation. (4) Hence we are obliged, apart from legislation, to do or avoid them. (5) Hence not all obligation is imposed by a superior. A naturalist, however, need not accept all these claims. If we agree with Suarez, we accept the frist, but not the second. If we agree with Vasquez, we accept the second, but not the first. As we have seen, it is not clear which position Grotius takes, and so it is not entirely unfair for Pufendorf to suggest that Grotius is committed to both (1) and (2). He is right to maintain that the acceptance of both steps conflicts with the belief in intrinsic rightness and wrongness. But both Suarez and Vasquez offer Grotius ways to preserve intrinsic rightness. Since naturalists have good reasons for rejecting either (1) or (2), they can avoid the inconsistency that Pufendorf ascribes to them. 
- Pufendorf replies that naturalists avoid an inconsistency only if they argue in a circle. In his view, Grotius is committed to these claims: (i) Natural law prescribes the good and prohibits the bad. (ii) ‘Good’ is to be understood here as ‘morally good’ (honestum). (iii) ‘Morally good’ is to be defnied as ‘what is prescribed by natural law’, or as involving obligation, which in turn involves a reference to law. (iv) Therefore claim (i) simply says that natural law prescribes and prohibits what it prescribes and prohibits.²⁸ We ought to avoid this circle by rejecting the naturalist interpretation of the claim that the natural law prescribes the good and prohibits the bad. The naturalist understands ‘good’ as ‘morally good’, but, because of (iii), this affirmation of intrinsic morality involves us in a circle. We must therefore take the naturalist (in claim (i)) to say that natural law prescribes the natural good, which is only prudentially and not morally good. Pufendorf follows Cumberland in favouring this interpretation, which denies intrinsic morality.²⁹ But is Pufendorf entitled to the claim in (iii), that moral goodness must be defnied by reference to a law? Suarez’s discussion of intrinsic morality rejects this claim. Pufendorf’s objection relies on a legislative conception of moral goodness; but since the naturalists reject this conception, their account of natural law is not circular. 
- He argues: (a) Calculation of advantage is not the appropriate basis for morally good action. (b) Hence, consideration of natural good is not the appropriate basis for morally good action. (c) The only appropriate basis comes from divine law. This argument is open to naturalist doubts. Suarez and Grotius believe the first claim; for though they take morally good action to depend on considerations of natural good, they deny that such considerations are confined to considerations of advantage. In their view, reasons of pleasure and advantage are not the only reasons derived from natural good. Hence they deny Pufendorf’s second claim.³² 
- If one identifies moral good with a certain kind of natural good, one may do this for eudaemonist reasons, as Aristotle, Aquinas, and Suarez do, taking moral goods to be those that make a specific sort of contribution to one’s own happiness. But even if one rejects this eudaemonist account of moral goods, one may still resist Pufendorf’s claim (2); for one may recognize natural moral goods whose goodness can be explained without reference to the agent’s happiness. To agree with Pufendorf about (2), we must believe, as Scotus does, that moral considerations necessarily go beyond any natural good. Scotus believes this because he believes that moral considerations are rational and impartial in ways that no natural good can be. 
- Pufendorf’s position on natural good, therefore, is consistent, but unstable. Once he concedes the natural character of prudential properties, he has no good reason to deny the natural character of moral properties. If he is right to deny the natural character of moral properties, he apparently ought to reject any appeal to nature to explain prudence. Instead of saying that appeals to nature support reasons of advantage, but not moral reasons, he should say that appeals to nature do not support reasons at all. The only source of reasons supporting practical principles—he ought to say—is desire for some end. If human beings in their natural state want self-preservation, they have reasons of advantage; but the reasons come from their desires, not from their nature, since they do not remain in the absence of the relevant desire. This is Hobbes’s position (or one of his positions) about reasons and natural goods. But it is not Pufendorf’s position. He could not accept it without serious damage to his whole outlook. That is why his position is unstable. His anti-naturalist account of morality does not give a good reason for rejecting natural morality while accepting natural prudence. Hence he needs to reject natural prudence as well as natural morality. To reject natural prudence is to take Hobbes’s predominant view about reasons; the full implications of this view commit us to a Humean account of practical reason. 
- If Pufendorf demands a just basis for accepting God’s rule over us, he seems to force himself into an infinite regress or into a contradiction. He faces an infinite regress if it is just to accept God’s rule only because God commands us to accept it; this command will itself need a just basis, which will require a further divine command, and so on. He contradicts himself if this just basis for accepting God’s rule is a principle of morality prior to any divine command; for any such principle shows that not all morality rests on divine commands. 
- Sometimes Pufendorf seems to appeal to a more overtly moral basis for accepting God as legislator. He demands that we love God for his goodness, so that we obey him out of admiration for his goodness, not simply out of gratitude for his beneficence to us.⁴⁴ This demand seems to introduce a moral judgment about God. For we do not simply admire God’s imposition of these laws on us, or God’s own observance of them. The mere fact of being a legislator or of observing one’s own laws does not justify admiration for someone’s goodness. Nor can we simply be moved by a desire to show our appreciation of the beneftis God has conferred on us. The fact that you have benefited me does not justify me in doing whatever you want me to do from a desire to repay you or to show my appreciation. If you save me from being murdered, that does not justify me in murdering someone else just because you ask me to.
- If gratitude to God is to be a suitable foundation for moral obligations and duties, we must act out of a warranted belief that God can be trusted to ask us to do right rather than wrong actions, and that therefore obedience to God is an appropriate way to show our gratitude. But this belief cannot simply be the belief that God is an almighty legislator who has created us; it presupposes that God prescribes actions that can (at least sometimes) be seen, on distinct grounds, to be morally right. In that case we appeal to intrinsic rightness and wrongness, which Pufendorf claims to have repudiated.⁴⁵ 
- Pufendorf, then, seems to be open to the objections that Cudworth raises against Hobbes. Kant summarizes these objections in claiming that positive law presupposes natural law.⁴⁶ 
- Pufendorf need not accept this objection to his legislative conception of moral rightness. He could reply in the way in which Hobbes could reply to Cudworth. Hobbes might concede that we think our moral judgments rest on something more than fear of punishments imposed by human or divine sanctions; but he might still argue that they actually rest on nothing more. If we cannot fnid a morally acceptable basis (by his opponents’ standards), we should abandon our initial assumptions about morality. Similarly, Pufendorf might claim that our obedience to God does not rest on moral reasons, but simply on the causal and psychological effects of our awareness of God’s power and benefcience, and our dependence on him. He might claim to be retaining all that can reasonably be maintained of our initial assumptions about morality. It is more difficult, however, for Pufendorf than for Hobbes to try this revisionary approach to morality. For he does not accept Hobbesian psychology. Nor does he question the initial assumptions about morality that he takes himself to share with his opponents. For he assumes that morality involves some sort of norm, rule, and obligation, and hence imposition by a superior. Without these connexions his argument collapses; he assumes that if we reject them, we are not talking about morality, but about some other sort of belief and practice. He therefore relies heavily on conceptual claims about the nature of morality, as opposed to (for instance) prudence; his arguments are futile if the conception of morality that he relies on is eccentric. But he seems to violate basic beliefs about morality if he claims that the authority of a moral legislator rests on a non-moral basis—fear or gratitude or a combination of them. He seems not to have explained morality, but to have recommended that we replace it with something else. 
- - We might reply on behalf of Pufendorf that the argument against Ockham does not rule out every sort of voluntarism.⁵⁵ Perhaps nothing is morally wrong without a divine command, but still the human species could not exist unless deliberate homicide was morally wrong. These claims are consistent if it is not possible for God to create human beings and not to prohibit deliberate homicide. The resulting position is still voluntarist, since it maintains, against Suarez and Grotius, that deliberate homicide would not be wrong unless God had prohibited it. The claim about God’s necessary will separates this view from the more extreme voluntarism of Ockham and Hobbes. In Hobbes’s view, nothing about the divine will and morality makes it necessary for God to command the observance of the principles that preserve human society and individual human beings; that is why God’s commanding it is an exercise of divine power rather than divine benevolence. Contrary to Hobbes, Pufendorf takes God’s choice of principles to be necessary.⁵⁶ But how are we to understand the necessity of God’s choosing to prohibit deliberate homicide among human beings? Pufendorf cannot answer that God sees that deliberate homicide is intrinsically wrong and therefore prohibits it. Cumberland answers that God is essentially rational, and therefore necessarily aims at the common good of rational beings; but Pufendorf does not endorse Cumberland’s views about reason and the common good. In his view, God is aware of the non-moral badness (i.e., disadvantage) of deliberate homicide, and necessarily prohibits it for that reason. Instead of saying, as Cumberland says, that God is essentially rational and therefore benevolent, Pufendorf seems to say that God is necessarily benevolent, but for no further reason. This conception of divine benevolence raises further questions for Pufendorf. It commits him to identifying morality with benevolence. Maxwell argues effectively against Cumberland, as Butler argues against utilitarianism, that benevolence is not the whole of morality. If he is right, a benevolent God cannot be guaranteed to legislate all and only what is morally right. But if we leave aside this question about the relation between benevolence and morality, Pufendorf still needs to explain the relation of benevolence to God’s freedom and God’s essence. If God is contingently benevolent, so that benevolence is an aspect of God’s ordered power, subject to changes resulting from the exercise of God’s unqualifeid power, God is free not to be benevolent. In that case, if God had not been benevolent, but had commanded human beings to act contrary to their rational nature, would such action have been right? If Pufendorf believes that right and wrong depend on divine legislation, he must answer Yes. But then it cannot be essential to morality that it requires what accords with rational nature, and Pufendorf is back to an Ockhamist view that he rejects. Apparently, then, Pufendorf needs to say that God is not free not to command actions that accord with rational nature. How, then, can Pufendorf maintain that God is still genuinely free? Aquinas and Suarez have an answer to this question, relying on their view that certain things are intrinsically right, given the nature of human beings. The fact that God is not free not to do what is intrinsically right does not reduce God’s genuine freedom; for it is not a diminution of freedom to recognize truths about what one ought to do and what it is best to do, any more than it is a diminution of freedom to recognize truths about the world. God’s knowledge of the truth and willing of the good are aspects of his perfection. Pufendorf, however, does not agree that God is guided in legislating by truths about what it is right to do, since there are no such truths apart from God’s legislation. Must he not admit, therefore, that God’s freedom is limited? The refusal to recognize natural rightness and wrongness raises diffciulties for his attempt to safeguard divine freedom. He claims that naturalists cannot reconcile their doctrine of intrinsic morality with divine freedom;⁵⁷ but it seems more difficult to reconcile divine freedom with the version of voluntarism that would support Pufendorf’s objections to Ockham. 
- He might answer these questions about freedom by asserting that God is essentially benevolent, and that action in accordance with one’s essence is not a limitation on one’s freedom. But then he needs to explain why God is essentially benevolent. This is explicable from a naturalist point of view; benevolence is an aspect of God’s perfection because it is required by intrinsic rightness. But it is more difficult to see how God’s essential benevolence is to be explained from a voluntarist point of view, without reference to intrinsic rightness. Pufendorf does not explain why God would not be God without benevolence, since benevolence does not seem to be among God’s perfections.⁵⁸ It is not clear, then, that Pufendorf has found a plausible version of voluntarism that avoids the aspects of naturalism and Ockhamism that he rejects. Though his position might be made consistent, it is difficult to defend on the basis of any plausible conception of a divine legislator. Once he rejects the naturalist view that God legislates on the basis of intrinsic morality, it is difficult to find a credible account of why God necessarily prescribes just those principles that naturalists ascribe to intrinsic morality. 
- This claim about creation, however, does not help Pufendorf’s legislative thesis about morality. The only sort of law that follows from the act of creation is the sort that Suarez calls indicative law, including every sort of norm or rule. Suarez denies that law in this broad sense is genuine law; for if it were genuine law, it would be trivially true, given Suarez’s view of rightness, that rightness presupposes law.
- Pufendorf’s different conceptions of law and legislation sometimes lead him into disagreement with naturalism; but sometimes he represents the naturalist view as though it were his own (because of his broad use of ‘law’ for indicative law). 
- Aristotle recognizes the difference between the city and other sorts of community, and argues that the functions peculiar to a city are necessary to fulfil human nature. These arguments in Politics i and iii are not answered by Pufendorf. 
- Even if we grant that, as Pufendorf supposes, God’s commands agree with (roughly speaking) natural good, we still need an explanation of why this is so. Does God command freely or necessarily? If God is free, by his unqualifeid power, to command something else, and (by hypothesis) is not guided by what is objectively right, it does not seem unfair to regard God’s choice as arbitrary. Alternatively, if God commands necessarily, what is the source of the necessity? If (by hypothesis) it is not the objective rightness of the action, but a psychological necessity in God, the choice of this action over others still seems arbitrary.³² 
- perhaps Pufendorf and Barbeyrac do not mean this. Perhaps they mean that the content of the natural law is fixed independently of God’s legislative will, but its character as morality depends on God’s legislation. This legislation, however, is necessary; it is not an exercise of God’s free will. The attempt to replace arbitrary will with necessary will raises further objections. For Barbeyrac cannot say that God’s choice of laws aimed at natural goods is necessary because God necessarily chooses the right; for if he said that, he would admit that right is independent of God’s choice, and so he would concede the whole point to Leibniz. But if it is a mere psychological necessity, not based in rational necessity, it does not seem less arbitrary in the relevant sense. Barbeyrac’s defence of Pufendorf on this point is therefore open to question. He is right to accuse Leibniz of not taking account of everything that Pufendorf says and of oversimplifying his position in ways that make it easier to refute with well-worn anti-voluntarist arguments. As Barbeyrac sees, Pufendorf modifies the voluntarist position in ways that escape criticisms that apply to Ockhamist voluntarism. But these modifications do not result in a defensible alternative to Leibniz’s naturalism. Either they collapse into naturalism or they are open to a modified version of the naturalist objections to Ockham. 
- Pufendorf has a way out of this objection only if the ‘just cause’ for God’s rule is non-moral. This may be what he has in mind; if we deny that God’s superiority rests simply on superior force, a moral basis is not the only alternative. We may also recognize someone as superior out of gratitude, love, admiration, or reverence, none of which necessarily rests on recognition of moral rightness. Leibniz’s objection, then, is too simple. But it may nonetheless be basically correct. For the non-moral attitudes that we have mentioned do not seem to provide a suffciient basis to show that God is an appropriate moral authority, or that his will could produce moral rightness. To be moved to obey someone out of gratitude, admiration, and so on is not to have any basis for believing that their commands will be morally right; and action exclusively from such motives is not the action of a morally virtuous person. 