- He maintains that moral rightness and wrongness are not dependent on the reaction of observers, and so he accepts one of the main rationalist objections against sentimentalism
- defends independent morality by appealing to a moral sense. 
- He is naturalist about the relation of the divine will to morality, but he is sentimentalist about our knowledge of moral properties 
- Shaftesbury protests against the view that egoism is the only safe alternative to enthusiasm. 
- If Leibniz concedes this point to Shaftesbury, he need not withdraw his claim that divine rewards and punishments are important. Even if they are not necessary to make virtue promote one’s happiness, they may provide signifciant further reasons for believing this claim, and especially for believing that virtue does not require a long-term sacrifice of happiness. Shaftesbury agrees on these points. But it does not follow that divine rewards and punishments are needed to demonstrate that virtue promotes happiness. 
- Shaftesbury is the first to use the terms ‘moral sense’ and ‘moral realist’. Since later believers in a moral sense, Hume and Hutcheson, reject moral realism, we may be surprised that Shaftesbury uses both terms to describe his own position. His philosophical allegiances also seem to lead him in different directions. On many points he agrees with Locke, but he also draws extensively on Platonic and Stoic sources.
- Though Shaftesbury agrees with Locke in general about the reasonable character of Christianity, and about the folly of opposing natural reason to revelation, Locke’s moral position outlook seems to agree with the ‘orthodox’ Christian outlook that Shaftesbury deplores. 
- Shaftesbury seems to maintain a Platonist metaphysics of morality together with a Lockean epistemology and moral psychology. On the one hand, he defends the reality of moral properties, apart from the will or preferences of agents, and the reality of moral virtue, apart from self-confined desires. These two claims constitute his ‘moral realism’. On the other hand, he seems to follow Locke’s views about the basis of knowledge and motivation; knowledge is based on the senses, and motivation on non-rational desire rather than reason. How can we be confident that the sensory basis of cognition, as Locke understands it, will support the belief in the independent reality of moral properties? 
- All of his critics and interpreters agree that he criticizes Hobbesian egoism. We may usefully begin with the criticisms that mark points of agreement with later sentimentalists; then we can ask whether he also criticizes Hobbes from a Platonist direction, and whether these criticisms fit a sentimentalist outlook. 
- According to Shaftesbury, we are immediately aware of moral goodness and rightness; we do not come to believe actions are right, or that people are good, as a result of considering whether they promote someone’s pleasure. We approve of them from an unselfsih point of view that considers the public interest.⁶ Those who are appropriately sensitive to moral goodness have more than a tendency towards benevolent actions; they also have the capacity to reflect on this tendency and to ‘take notice of what is worthy or honest; and make that notice or conception of worth and honesty to be an object of his affection’
- ‘A man who in a passion happens to kill his companion relents immediately on the sight of what he has done . . . If, on the other side, we suppose him not to relent or suffer any real concern or shame; then either he has no sense of the deformity of the crime and injustice, no natural affection, and consequently no happiness or peace within: or if he has any sense of moral worth or goodness, it must be of a perplexed and contradictory kind’
- This recognition of moral properties may be compared to sense-perception. Conscience expresses itself in judgments about the rightness of this or that action, as well as in the grasp of general principles. Both aspects of conscience are often immediate, not involving any explicit reasoning and derivation. Hence they may be described as a sense of right and wrong.⁷ Shaftesbury uses such expressions to refer to these immediate reactions to particular situations.⁸ 
- A different basis for belief in a moral sense is the assimilation of moral to aesthetic awareness. We have found this assimilation in Culverwell, who describes natural rightness (honestas) and wrongness (turpitudo) as proper objects of admiration and disgust; he regards them as appealing and repellent, apart from any narrow self-interest. Aesthetic responses offer a useful parallel to moral reactions in being both immediate and disinterested. If we fnid something beautiful, appealing, repulsive, or disgusting, we do not seem to be recording a conclusion we have reached on the basis of any reasoning; nor do we seem to be reporting on our own interest. The disinterestedness of our appreciation of beauty suggests how we might appreciate moral goodness and badness in a similarly disinterested way. According to Shaftesbury, we recognize beauty and charm in moral as well as natural objects apart from any views about our own interest (Misc. 5, ch. 3 = K 466). Ancient moralists who speak of the kalon might be taken to rely on this parallel between aesthetic and moral reactions; Shaftesbury treats their remarks as evidence of the parallel.⁹ 
- The comparison between a moral sense and the sense of beauty helps to explain why virtuous people refuse even to consider certain kinds of questions. Shaftesbury compares the question ‘Why be honest in the dark?’ with the question ‘Why keep yourself clean if no one can smell?’ In the second case, he answers that he would not care to associate with someone who needed to ask himself this question and did not take it for granted that he should keep himself clean. The appropriate reaction to not keeping clean is not refelctive, but aesthetic—an immediate sense of disgust. Similarly, virtuous people are not those who can always explain why we should be honest in the dark and therefore always act honestly; they would not dream of asking the question. To be a virtuous person is to be repelled by the very thought of taking this question seriously as though it needed an answer in particular cases  
- ‘The sense of right and wrong’, therefore, captures Stoic claims about the fnie.¹⁰ Shaftesbury agrees with the Stoics’ appeal to the immediate recognition and admiration of actions and characters that benefit others or promote a common good, independently of any benefti to the agent.¹¹ 
- Shaftesbury claims, then, that we are aware of moral rightness and wrongness by some sort of quasi-aesthetic sense that includes some pleasure sufficient for motivation. Our ‘inward eye’ distinguishes fair and foul in actions and characters no less than in other beautiful and ugly objects. Disputes about what is fair and foul presuppose that we have some conception of the relevant qualities; otherwise we could not identify the area of dispute.¹² Our ordinary moral sentiments of gratitude, resentment, pride, and shame presuppose some conception of the relevant moral qualities that are the proper objects of the sentiments. To explain the connexion between sentiment and principle, Shaftesbury alludes to the Stoic doctrine of ‘preconceptions’ or ‘anticipations’ (proleˆpseis); he claims that we have ‘a natural presumption or anticipation on which resentment or anger is founded’ (Mor. 3.2 = Char. ii 419 = K 329).¹³ This natural ‘presumption’ embodies an implicit principle that guides our sentiment, and attention to the sentiment reveals the underlying principle.¹⁴ 
- The aesthetic character of the moral sentiment does not compromise the objectivity of moral properties or the rationality of moral principles. Shaftesbury accepts the Stoic doctrine of the honestum as what deserves praise in its own right, apart from whether it is actually praised.¹⁵ He advocates the cultivation of moral taste and a sense of moral appropriateness that will be as keen as the cultivated person’s sense of the appropriate and suitable in clothes, or paintings, or music, because he believes that this sense of appropriateness will make us aware of moral facts, and especially of the admirable characteristics of actions and characters that are concerned for others. The sense of moral appropriateness is not a substitute for grasp of the right principles, but it is an essential support for it; if our sentiments diverge sharply from the actions enjoined by our principles, they will counteract the effect of our principles.¹⁶ 
- In arguing for a moral sense Shaftesbury intends a claim about motivation as well as judgment. We are not only capable of judging from an impartial point of view, but also capable of acting on this point of view. Awareness of cruelty or injustice moves us to action because it is cruelty or injustice, whether or not it affects our own interest. This capacity for action on disinterested motives confilcts with Hobbes’s psychological hedonism. Inthelightofthisaffirmationofnon-egoisticmotivation,somereadershavebeensurprised by Shaftesbury’s discussion of our ‘obligation’ to virtue. This term often causes confusion in the British moralists; but in this context Shaftesbury explains himself by identifying our obligation with our ‘reason to embrace it’ (ICV ii 1.1 = K 192).¹⁷ He answers this question by explaining why virtue promotes the agent’s happiness. He does not directly say that this is the only reason we could have for embracing virtue; but since he suggests no other reason, he seems to assume that a suffciient reason for being virtuous must at least include a warranted belief that virtue promotes one’s happiness. 
- We might be surprised that Shaftesbury mentions only this reason for being virtuous, after what he has said about the disinterested character of the moral sense.¹⁸ Martineau voices this disappointment strongly; he suggests that after affirming the possibility of disinterested motivation, Shaftesbury reverts to a self-interested hedonist outlook.¹⁹ Martineau cites the remarks about the moral sense in order to show that Shaftesbury recognizes a basis of moral goodness that is independent of any appeal to self-interest. A virtuous person is one who regards the moral properties of actions as the sources of sufficient reasons in their own right. Why, then, should some reason based in self-interest be needed? Shaftesbury’s acceptance both of a disinterested conception of a moral sense and of a self-interested defence of morality should not surprise us as much as it surprises Martineau. We need only recall the structure of eudaemonist ethical theories. If we understand the pursuit of happiness as the pursuit of rational structure and harmony in our different activities, it is reasonable to examine the contribution of virtue to happiness. 
- He agrees with Cumberland that virtuous people’s outlook does not subordinate the common good to their own pleasure. In his view, the affection for the public interest is a source of pleasures.²¹ These pleasures arise partly from sympathetic participation in the pleasures of others (ICV ii 2.1 = 202 K), and partly from refelxion on and approval of our own benevolent attitudes. This reflective conscience is distinct from fear of punishment, even of divine punishment; someone who observes the requirements of morality simply from the fear of divine punishment lacks a necessary condition for conscience. This is a hedonist defence of virtue only if Shaftesbury means that the social and sympathetic pleasures enjoyed by a virtuous person are greater than those enjoyed by others, as estimated from a neutral point of view. The virtuous person, on this view, gets more pleasure than the vicious person, just as we get more pleasure from savouring each bite of a well-cooked dish than we get from bolting it down without tasting it properly. Shaftesbury, however, does not seem to intend his claims about pleasure to be understood in this way.²³ He suggests that it is trifling to say that pleasure is our good, because ‘will’ and ‘pleasure’ are synonymous. To say that we do what we please, or that we aim at our pleasure, simply means that we choose what we think eligible. In asking where we should seek our pleasure, we are asking what is really eligible; we should be asking how to distinguish good from bad pleasure (Mor. 2.1 = K 250–1). If we identify happiness with pleasure, we are saying that our good consists in doing what we like; but since our preferences and likings change, identification of our good with the satisfaction of our preferences makes our good variable and unstable
- expression of concern for others is a vital part of our interest. Opponents of this claim about virtue and happiness rely on a narrow conception of interest and happiness that obscures the real questions.²⁴ 
- We can clarify the issue about happiness once we recognize that a person’s good is not to be defined simply by reference to the satisfaction of desires. As Shaftesbury puts it, the good does not depend entirely on ‘fancy’, because ‘there is that in which the nature of man is satisfeid, and which alone must be his good’ (Mor. iii 3 = Char. ii 436 = K 335). In the light of our conception of human nature, we can see which passions are suitable to us, and fnid an appropriate ‘balance of . . . passions’, constituting ‘beauty and decorum’ in one’s internal states (Mor. ii 4 = Char. ii 294 = K 277). Contrary to Hobbes, we find that society and the aims and affections that support it are natural to human beings. The pleasures that belong to social sentiment are part of a human being’s happiness not because they are greater than any other pleasures, but because of their role in the human good.²⁵ 
- we may with justice surely place it as a principle, ‘that if anything be natural in any creature or any kind, it is that which is preservative of the kind itself, and conducing to its welfare . . . If any appetite or sense be natural, the sense of fellowship is the same’
- Since the good appropriate to human nature consists in the right internal order of self-regarding and other-regarding sentiments and passions, happiness comes from within and not from outside a person (Mor. iii 2 = K 335). Non-moral goods benefti us only if they are used properly. The moral good, by contrast, is good in its own right; it is most agreeable in itself, and preferable to all these external goods (Mor. iii 2 = K 332). The awareness of good order in one’s own nature is the source of a higher enjoyment than we receive from other sources - so, we might see that Shaftesbury is not a hedonists.
- Shaftesbury seems to recognize this point when he discusses the human good. In claiming that the human good includes the satisfaction of the social affections, he does not claim that by satisfying these affections we gain more pleasure, or that people always or often care most about satisfaction of these affections. He claims that these are the affections that deserve to be satisfeid. 
- Shaftesbury is closer to Platonism than to Locke. Though many remarks suggest that he takes Hobbes’s and Locke’s view on virtue and happiness, the main tendency of his position agrees with the Greek moralists whom he cites with approval. His account of our ‘obligation’ to virtue is expressed as a claim about enjoyment, but it is really an argument for the position of the Greek moralists, that virtue is a part of the human good, correctly conceived. A Lockean interpretation of Shaftesbury is easy and attractive; it leads Hutcheson to his defence of Shaftesbury. But closer inspection shows that it does not capture Shaftesbury’s position. 
- A voluntarist might reply that Shaftesbury misunderstands the relation between the categorical claim in (1) and the counterfactual in (2). In (1) we refer to what is just, according to God’s ordered power. In (2) we refer to what would be just if God had not exercised absolute power in the way God has in fact exercised it, but had made it just to punish one person for the crimes of another. This is how Scotus exploits Anselm’s claim that what God wills is necessarily just.⁴⁰ If this is a legitimate reply, Shaftesbury does not demonstrate that voluntarists are committed to the truth of contradictions. But if voluntarists try this answer to Shaftesbury, they need to explain what they mean in claiming that God is just or that God’s decisions are just. If we entirely separate justice from the traits and actions that involve fairness, reciprocity, respect for desert, and so on, we are not claiming what we might initially have appeared to be claiming in saying that God is just; it is not clear that we ascribe any definite moral property to God at all. Voluntarists would be better off, therefore, if they denied that God is essentially just. By an exercise of absolute power God chooses to be just, but not because it is better to be just than to be unjust; if God had chosen differently, it would have been better to be unjust than to be just. This is a consistent position that avoids Shaftesbury’s objection about contradiction. 
- Our discussion of Shaftesbury’s attack on voluntarism has revealed two aspects of the position that he calls ‘realism’. He opposes it not only to the legislative thesis that **moral properties depend on will and legislation**, but also to the **reductive thesis that reduces the moral motive to the desire for one’s own pleasure**. Hence he regards Hobbes as a merely nominal moralist both because of his voluntarism and because of his egoism. Similarly, he accuses theological voluntarists not only of denying that moral facts are independent of God’s legislative will, but also of denying the possibility of disinterested morality.
- Shaftesbury believes that Locke has encouraged both aspects of nominalism. While most people reject Hobbes’s moral views, they do not see that Locke endorses Hobbes’s basic principles, and so makes it easier for other people to accept them. Locke argues illegitimately from his rejection of innate ideas to the conclusion that there are no natural moral properties that we naturally recognize.⁴⁵ Shaftesbury rejects Hobbes’s and Locke’s assumption that an adequate defence of morality must connect morally good action with some further source of pleasure beyond itself—either (as in Hobbes) some further advantage to the agent in this life or (as in Locke) some further advantage in the afterlife. 
- But even if Shaftesbury’s conception of realism is excusable as a reply to opponents who are both voluntarists and egoists, is it nonetheless confused in treating two separable views as aspects of a single realist position? Perhaps something further can be said in his defence. If we are realists about moral properties, holding them to be independent of will and legislation, we must also hold them to be irreducible in certain ways. If some people think moral goodness is purely instrumental goodness promoting the agent’s pleasure, they may claim to be moral realists insofar as they think moral goodness is a real property of things. Still, they do not recognize the distinct reality of moral properties in contrast to pleasure-promoting properties. We therefore have a good reason for denying that Hobbes’s belief in real pleasure-promoting properties makes him a moral realist, even though he claims that they are moral properties. Suarez, by contrast, is a moral realist even though he is a eudaemonist, because he recognizes the moral good (the honestum) as a distinct sort of good besides the pleasant and the advantageous (dulce and utile). His belief in ‘intrinsic’ moral goodness recognizes moral goodness as a further property besides pleasure and advantage. He therefore passes both of Shaftesbury’s tests for being a moral realist. Though Shaftesbury does not explain why a single realist position requires the rejection of both voluntarism and Hobbesian egoism, he has a good reason for his view. He is entitled to criticize those whom he calls the ‘modern Epicureans’ because they reduce social sentiments to selfish ones (Sens. Comm. iii 3 = K 55). Those who degrade ‘honesty’ (i.e., moral goodness)⁴⁶ by making it only a name are the selfish moralists (Sens. Comm. iii 4 = K 58). These moralists treat the difference between the honest person and the knave as simply a matter of instrumental calculation. This connexion between the metaphysical and the motivational sides of Shaftesbury’s realism tends to support his claim that his theological voluntarist opponents are egoists. If all moral distinctions rest on the legislative will of God, it is difficult to see how obedience to God’s legislative will could have any moral basis. This does not imply that a disinterested love of God is impossible; for moral attitudes are not the only disinterested attitudes. Shaftesbury goes too fast, therefore, in suggesting that his opponents who derive morality from the legislative will of God cannot allow a disinterested love of God. Nonetheless, his position is defensible. For if they deny any moral basis for obedience to a legislative will, they remove the main reason one might offer for taking disinterested love for God to be appropriate.⁴⁷  If, then, disinterested love (apart from the influence of sanctions) for God is the morally appropriate basis for obedience to divine commands, not everything that is morally appropriate is the product of legislation. If disinterested love is appropriate only because of legislation, we can still ask why we should obey that legislation. The demand for non-mercenary love of God is much more reasonable on the realist assumption than on the voluntarist assumption. 
- Shaftesbury, therefore, deplores the tendency to combine a purely legislative theory of morality with a purely external account of obligation (taking it to depend on rewards and punishments). In seeking some natural basis for morality, he rejects some versions of orthodox Christianity. Some of his remarks suggest that he rejects orthodox Christianity altogether, and not merely some versions of it; and his opponents take his unorthodox views to be a ground for rejecting his view of morality.⁴⁸ But his views about morality and its sanctions do not seem to be unorthodox in themselves. He insists that belief in post-mortem rewards should be a secondary motive to virtue, but he agrees that it is an appropriate motive in its proper place. He argues that belief in a confilct between virtue and happiness in this life cannot be reconciled with sound theism, because it would imply doubts about the goodness and providence of God. For similar reasons he agrees with the belief in post-mortem rewards for virtue.⁴⁹ 
- whoever has a firm belief of a God, whom he does not merely call good, but of whom in reality he believes nothing beside real good, nothing beside what is truly suitable to the exactest character of benignity and goodness; such a person believing rewards or retributions in another life, must believe them annexed to real goodness and merit, real villainy and baseness, and not to any accidental quality or circumstances
- Shaftesbury sketches a defence that is developed more fully, and with more specifci reference to orthodox Christianity, by Clarke and Balguy.⁵¹ 
- Though Shaftesbury does not allow the prospect of rewards and punishments, in this life or the next life, to be the sole or primary motive for virtue, he allows it an important role. In his view, virtue contributes to happiness, and thereby lays the foundation of distributive justice in the world; but it is only a foundation, and we are right to look for the completion of the building in the afterlife.⁵⁰ The disinterested recognition and love of virtue provides an argument for an afterlife and for a God who matches virtue to happiness. Contrary to the modern theologians who appeal exclusively to the legislative will of God, the realist view does not threaten the truth of Christian doctrine.
- These claims about a moral sense allow objective moral properties. If we are immediately aware of them, they may still be aspects of ftiness to rational nature, as Suarez supposes. Shaftesbury’s suggestion that we have a natural sense of the honestum might indicate that he agrees with Suarez’s conception of the nature of moral properties. Belief in a moral sense conflicts with realism, however, if we hold a Lockean conception of a sense and its objects. According to Locke, or one common interpretation of Locke, senses whose objects are secondary qualities do not tell us about objective features of the world, but only about our own ideas. If Shaftesbury accepts a Lockean conception, his belief in a moral sense commits him to claims about moral knowledge that conflict with metaphysical realism about moral properties. But belief in a moral sense does not by itself require Lockean epistemological claims. As Reid points out later, belief in a moral sense does not push us towards realism or anti-realism until we decide how we are to conceive the relevant sort of sense.⁵³ Hutcheson makes up his mind on this question, by accepting a Lockean conception of a sense, and therefore rejecting realism about moral properties.⁵⁴ But Shaftesbury does not commit himself to this Lockean doctrine, and so he does not take his claims about a moral sense to conflict with realism. 
- Even apart from Locke’s views about senses and their objects, belief in a moral sense raises diffciulties for realism if we take moral properties to be essentially what the moral sense approves of. This view implies that approval by the moral sense constitutes rightness, so that if there were no moral sense, nothing would be right or wrong, and if our moral sense were to change, moral rightness and wrongness would change with it. Shaftesbury’s failure to maintain these metaphysical claims about the moral sense is not simply a sign of his theoretical imprecision. His limited use of a moral sense makes his Platonist metaphysics of morality consistent with his epistemology. Since he does not take moral properties to be essentially those that are grasped by the moral sense, he does not claim that if our moral sense changed, right and wrong would change. He treats the moral sense as our means of access to properties that exist independently of it. He introduces the natural sense of right and wrong to argue that even false religious beliefs cannot take away our sense of right and wrong actions existing in their own right apart from legislation, inducements, or threats. 
- If Shaftesbury took approval by the moral sense to constitute moral properties, he would undermine his realism and his arguments against voluntarism. He would be subject to the argument that he aims at the theological voluntarists. In his view, we recognize God’s will as morally perfect because we regard moral properties as distinct from what God approves. Similarly, we recognize that someone’s moral sense is right because we believe in moral properties that are distinct from what the moral sense approves. Balguy uses this argument effectively against Hutcheson’s belief in a constitutive relation between the moral sense and moral properties.⁵⁵ But it does not affect Shaftesbury, since he treats the moral sense as a sign of objective moral properties, not as their metaphysical basis. His defenders are right to argue that he does not make moral rightness (the honestum) depend on its being approved. 
- Though Shaftesbury anticipates Hutcheson in speaking of a moral sense, his remarks on the sense of right and wrong do not deny that moral judgment is rational; they simply seem to assert that we have some immediate and disinterested grasp of moral goodness.
- When Shaftesbury defends a ‘realist’ position against ‘nominal moralists’, he rejects both Hobbesian egoism and Hobbesian voluntarism; but it is not always clear that he distinguishes these two Hobbesian claims.
- Hume might reasonably believe, however, that Hutcheson is inexplicit about the subjectivist implications of his position. In his early work Hutcheson defends Shaftesbury’s ‘realist’ position. He does not explicitly abandon that position in Illustrations, even though he affirms the subjective character of moral properties. He insists that his position does not question the ‘reality’ of our moral ideas, any more than it questions the reality of our idea of pleasure. By this he means that the idea of pleasure is a real and distinct idea, even though pleasure is subjective.¹³ This sort of ‘reality’, however, is not the whole of Shaftesbury’s moral realism; for Shaftesbury also treats moral properties as objective.¹









#                  Difficulties

- Sometimes he seems to be an anti-rationalist about motivation and action.²⁰ He argues that the choice of one end over another, in cases where instrumental reasoning cannot decide the issue, must be the outcome of the different impacts of desires of different strengths. It is not clear, however, whether he believes that every desire must be the outcome of some prior non-rational desire focussed by instrumental reasoning. Hutcheson commits himself to this aspect of anti-rationalism, but Shaftesbury does not go so far. His attitude to hedonism is also imprecise. He distinguishes the virtuous person from the straightforwardly calculating hedonist who considers, as Hobbes’s ‘fool’ does, whether this or that virtuous action will promote his own interest. To reject the attitude of the fool, however, is not to reject one’s own pleasure as a ground for pursuing the virtues in general. And Shaftesbury seems to rely on a hedonist assumption. In his view, happiness ‘is generally computed’ from pleasures or satisfactions (ICV ii 2.1 = K 201).
- But what does he take to be the connexion between our reason for pursuing morality and our inclination to be moral? Does he believe that we have reasons, independent of inclination, to strengthen inclinations that favour morality? Or does he believe that if our inclinations favouring morality weakened, we would have less reason to pursue morality? The choice between these two views determines how far Shaftesbury goes in accepting rationalism about reasons and naturalism about the human good. We might reasonably expect him to favour the naturalist answer that takes reasons to be distinct from strength of desire; for he normally claims that human happiness depends on human nature, not that it depends on human desires. But he does not seem to reach a clear view about the nature of our reasons to favour morality. This is the basis of Butler’s objection to Shaftesbury. Since Butler sympathizes with Shaftesbury’s naturalism, he notices the place where Shaftesbury fails (in Butler’s view) to recognize the implications of a naturalist defence of morality.³¹ 
- He seems, therefore, to leave open the logical possibility of a clash between what we approve of and what is really right. Realism implies that our moral sense—even an idealized sense (in which the idealization does not include a reference to real moral qualities)—does not constitute moral rightness; hence it is logically and metaphysically possible for it to be wrong. But if we have no access to any other means of knowing moral properties, we cannot correct our moral sense (except within limits that assume the reliability of the moral sense). If, then, it were mistaken, we could not know this. How, then, do we know that it is not mistaken now? Realism plus a moral sense theory seems to encourage scepticism. This argument needs more careful consideration. One ought not to dismiss a theory simply because it leaves some room for scepticism; every realist theory does that. But Shaftesbury is in a stronger position if he believes that the moral sense is not our only means of access to moral properties in the world. If he believes we can correct our moral sense by reason, he can answer critics who ask why we ought to trust our current moral sense, but ought not to trust our moral sense if it began to approve of injustice and cruelty. Shaftesbury’s metaphysical and epistemological claims about moral reality and the moral sense raise these questions that he does not pursue. 
