- Hedonism is true
- Self-awareness does not have any non-instrumental value
- Self-interest conflicts with interest of others
- Tries to find why we have our moral beliefs
- Critisizes Aristotle for being estethical intuitionist rather than moral philosopher
- Christianity cannot be understood in Greek ethic's terms
- Butler rejects this primacy of self-love. Sidgwick recognizes the importance of the question raised by Butler, and discusses it in his account of practical reason. Sidgwick also claims that Butler recognizes a ‘dualism’ of practical reason; not only are there two irreducible principles, but neither is subordinate to the other or to any third principle. 
- The rational pursuit of happiness gives us the reason that impartial justice is even more rational that pursuit of happiness
- Sidgwick agrees with Barbeyrac’s claim that modern moralists recognize natural law as fundamental. According to Sidgwick, modern moralists take this view because they rely on a ‘jural’ notion that is largely foreign to the teleological outlook of Greek ethics.¹⁸ According to the teleological outlook, a virtue is fundamentally some kind of good; the theorist’s task is to find the connexion between the good that is virtue and other goods (ME 106). A jural outlook, on the contrary, conceives moral principles as imperative and inhibitive, rather than teleological.
- Sidgwick, therefore, does not believe in a sharp transition from a teleological to a jural conception of ethics, and does not believe that any sharp transition of this sort separates modern from pre-modern ethics
- Sidgwick implies that we do not hold a jural conception simply by believing in natural law. A jural moralist, in his view, treats moral principles as primarily imperative. Since Sidgwick assumes this connexion between law and imperatives, he seems to hold an imperative conception of law; that is why he takes any inclination to believe in moral law to imply acceptance of an imperative conception of morality.
- But what is an ‘imperative’ conception of a moral principle? Sidgwick’s answer is not completely clear, because he seems to combine two conceptions of the imperative:
    - Sometimes he contrasts ‘imperative’ with ‘attractive’. Attractive principles refer explicitly to some desirable goal that the principles secure, whereas imperative principles do not. Hence ‘imperative’ seems to be equivalent to ‘deontological’.
    - Sometimes he assumes that imperative principles depend on acts of legislation.
- Sidgwick’s appreciative account of Shaftesbury does not mention Platonism or realism. In Sidgwick’s view, Shaftesbury’s Characteristics marks ‘a turning-point in the history of English ethical thought’, because he is ‘the first moralist who distinctly takes psychological experience as the basis of ethics’
- In reply to Clarke’s question one might ask why one should suppose that my interest does not make all the difference. To understand this question, we need to understand the force of ‘why one should suppose’. Does this ‘why’ ask for a reason from the impartial point of view, or a reason from my self-interested point of view? Or can we identify some third point of view? This question underlies the argument that leads Sidgwick to affirm an ultimate dualism of practical reason.³⁵
- Some normal judges will approve of utility (we may grant), but others will not. Hutcheson’s utilitarian analysis of virtues, rights, and laws of nature may well be a true report of what he approves of. But he cannot claim that this necessarily gives a reason for others to approve of the same things; whether they have a reason or not depends on how they react. Sidgwick believes that for these reasons Hutcheson cannot adequately defend the objective truth of utilitarianism. In Sidgwick’s view, a proper rational defence of utilitarianism, or any other objective moral principle, depends on acceptance of a rationalist account of moral judgments, in contrast to Hutcheson’s sentimentalism. He suggests that on this point Hume drew the logical conclusion from Hutcheson’s position, and so made people aware of the dangerous consequences of sentimentalism.³⁸ Sidgwick wrongly suggests that only Hume’s endorsement of Hutcheson’s sentimentalism made the implications of Hutcheson’s position clear. As we will see, Balguy and Burnet (not to mention Butler) already criticize Hutcheson’s sentimentalism for its subjectivist tendencies; they do not need Hume to point out the implications of Hutcheson’s position. But Sidgwick is right about the philosophical issue that Hutcheson raises. If we try to defend utilitarianism without sentimentalism, we raise doubts about the sentimentalist assumptions that make utilitarianism seem attractive in the first place. 
- It would be consistent to agree with Doddridge and Grove about the divine nature against voluntarists and sentimentalists, and still to accept utilitarianism; for one might argue that a perfectly reasonable agent will accept utilitarianism. Cumberland holds that God rationally chooses to promote the common good because this is the reasonable end; and one might defend a parallel claim about utility. Hutcheson’s rationalist opponents, however, deny that practical reason supports utilitarianism; Balguy, Butler, Doddridge, and Price all maintain that practical reason imposes some limits on the pursuit of maximum utility. In defending utilitarianism on rationalist grounds Sidgwick accepts a position that his 18th-century predecessors consider and reject.⁵² 






#                  Difficulties

- These two conceptions of the imperative (as attractive and as depending on act of legislation) do not seem to pick out all and only the same principles. We may recognize rational principles that are not explicitly teleological, but nonetheless give reasons; if so, we recognize imperatives in Sidgwick’s first sense. But it is not clear that we must also regard these principles as products of legislation, and hence as imperatives in his second sense. Scotus, for instance, may believe that our affection for the just commits us to rational principles that are neither teleological nor legislative. It is not clear whether Sidgwick allows the possibility of such principles, or whether he regards them as imperative. If a jural conception requires only a deontological conception of moral principles, Sidgwick’s contrast between the modern and the pre-modern outlook is insecure. Even if we set aside Scotus, Plato and Aristotle and their successors do not hold a purely teleological theory of the virtues. They believe that the virtues count as virtues because of their relation to the agent’s good; but they do not assume that the content of the virtues is determined by reference to the agent’s good. Aristotle does not suggest that we find out what is just or brave primarily by reflexion on our own good. What we ought (dein) to do, and what it is fine (kalon) to do, are determined by the common good of our community, rather than by our own good, though our reason for caring about justice and bravery depends on their relation to our own good. Aristotle’s conception of the fine refers to the tendency of actions to promote a common good. His conception of morality is not directly teleological, and so it satisfies one of Sidgwick’s conditions for a jural conception.
- Sidgwick’s combination of independent morality, as a metaphysical position, with utilitarianism as a normative position. 