- Even though I recognize that peace is good and that it is in my interest to observe the laws of nature, I sometimes care more about satisfying some particular passion—anger, spite, gratitude, for instance—and so I knowingly act against my perceived interest. In this case my passions do not distort my conception of my interest, but they cause me to act against it nonetheless, and so I violate the demands of peace. 
- Even though I recognize that peace is good and that it is in my interest to observe the laws of nature, I sometimes care more about satisfying some particular passion—anger, spite, gratitude, for instance—and so I knowingly act against my perceived interest. In this case my passions do not distort my conception of my interest, but they cause me to act against it nonetheless, and so I violate the demands of peace.
- Spinoza suggests that his philosophy supports important practical conclusions. It shows us why we should depart from some ordinary assumptions and outlooks on life. We should not care as much as most people care about the goals, aims, and concerns that we adopt under the influence of emotions. Human bondage consists in ‘man’s lack of power to moderate [or ‘‘govern’’, moderari] and restrain the affects’ (Ethics 4Pref. = C 543).¹ Spinoza agrees with one of the main tendencies of Platonic and Aristotelian moral philosophy. 
- Spinoza, however, rejects Aquinas’ alternative to domination by the passions. Aquinas believes that our main ethical task is to exercise our will in free and responsible action that restrains and controls our emotions; we should form our will in accordance with a true conception of the proper ultimate end of a human being, and if we freely choose to adapt, modify, or restrain our passions in the light of this end, we achieve the virtues.
- Scholastic errors rest on false conceptions of freedom and of teleological order. Once we reveal these errors, we can understand human freedom and the human good without reference to indefensible claims about will and agency. 
- He argues that, as Hobbes also believes, the Scholastic view implies that human actions are entirely outside the natural order of cause and effect and of natural law. Since Spinoza believes that human actions cannot have this status, he rejects the Scholastic conception of agency. But he does not thereby undermine belief in agency; he might still allow an account that avoided the Scholastic non-naturalist assumptions. 
- He seems to hold, however, that Hobbes repeats the errors of the Scholastics; for Hobbes retains their assumption that we can affect our behaviour by our will, deliberation, and election. This seems to be a common-sense assumption about will and action, not confnied to any particular philosophical theory. If Spinoza rejects this common-sense assumption, he seems to leave little room for agency, and hence little room for ethics. If, then, we are convinced by Spinoza’s metaphysics, and we agree that it undermines traditional ethics, perhaps we will find that it undermines his own ethics too. On the other hand, if we interpret the metaphysical conclusions so that they leave room for Spinoza’s ethical outlook, perhaps we will find that they lose their force against traditional views. 
- Spinoza does not believe that he faces this dilemma, because his ethical views seem to him to be defensible without common-sense assumptions about agency. We need to see whether he can reconstruct ethics so that it can do without agency. 
- Spinoza rejects that mental states can cause bodily movements, but this assumption, in his view, is false. He especially attacks Descartes for his belief in the possibility of interaction between mind and body. Descartes believes in interaction through the medium of the pineal gland, and Spinoza rejects this account of how interaction is possible (5Pref = C 596). But he does not merely reject Descartes’s account; he also believes that what Descartes tries to explain cannot be explained, because there is nothing to explain. Interaction between mind and body is impossible, according to Spinoza, because we cannot recognize the appropriate sorts of necessitating relations between mental and bodily events.
- To say that everything we are aware of is some state of the body is to reject a version of mind-body dualism. Spinoza denies that our awareness of an act of will or thought gives us knowledge of a purely mental event with no bodily aspect at all. But even if he is right about this, mind and body may interact; for if mental events are also bodily events, they seem to be capable of causing bodily events. In this respect, we might be tempted to express Spinoza’s position as a form of materialism, affriming that all mental events are also physical events with physical causes and effects.⁴ This materialist view, however, does not take account of all of Spinoza’s views. He goes further insofar as he also denies interaction between mental and bodily events. For he does not agree that a mental event can cause a physical event, even if the mental event is itself physical. He suggests that the mental event is simply the awareness of a bodily event. When we think our intention of raising our arm has caused us to raise our arm, we are wrong; our intention is simply the awareness of a physical event that has really caused the rising of our arm. The causal connexion holds not between our intention and the rising of our arm, but between the physical event our intention makes us aware of and the rising of our arm.
- Perhaps, however, Spinoza fnids this Cartesian sceptical argument plausible in this case, because it fits some of his views about causation and logical necessity. If we admit that it is logically possible (for all we know) that our intention to raise our arm does not cause our arm to rise, we admit that it is not logically necessary (for all we know) that our intention causes our arm to rise. But since Spinoza thinks of causation as logical necessitation, our inability to defend a logically necessary connexion implies inability to defend a genuine causal connexion. We may reply by challenging Spinoza’s conception of causation. If we have good reason to believe that intentions cause actions, but we do not assert a logically necessary connexion between intentions and actions, have we not found counter-examples to Spinoza’s claim about causation? Spinoza would not allow this form of objection by counter-example. His account of causation is not intended to offer the most plausible understanding of intuitively accepted examples of causes and effects. On the contrary, it is part of a foundationalist argument. The account of causation is supposed to be certain and evident in itself; it is not intended as an analysis of an intuitive concept of causation, but it is a basis from which intuitive concepts can be criticized, and, if necessary, rejected.
- If this is so, we have no good reason to agree with Spinoza’s conclusions about agency unless we accept some of the most disputable aspects of his metaphysical system and of its underlying epistemology. He does not seem to have any plausible argument that can be defended independently of his whole system. 
- Spinoza’s views about agency, therefore, go beyond the assertion of materialism. They imply that we are quite mistaken in our beliefs about the causal relevance of our mental states. We believe that the fact that our intention is an intention to raise our arm is causally relevant to the fact that our bodily movement is a raising of our arm. But, according to Spinoza, this belief is false. We know that some bodily changes are happening, but we cannot say, on the basis of our mental states, which bodily changes they are, or what causes them.⁸ 
- Though Spinoza rejects the common belief that mental states are causally relevant to bodily actions, he does not deny that they are causally relevant to something. He believes that mental states cause mental states. In his view, it is possible to find the right sorts of logical connexions between bodily states and events, and also between mental states and events. Each of these mental states is also the idea of a bodily state. 
- In Spinoza’s view, this belief in freedom conflicts with facts about the causal order of the universe. He takes the essential element of freedom to be self-determination (the ‘liberty of spontaneity’) rather than the capacity for opposites (the ‘liberty of indifference’). A free agent would have to be determined entirely by itself without any external determination. God, therefore, is self-determined, being identical to the whole universe, but lacks the capacity for opposites. We are not identical to the whole universe, but are finite modes of it; hence we are determined externally, and so we cannot be free. Since we do not know the causes of our acts of will, we believe they are uncaused, and therefore we believe we are self-determined and free. Since we do not know the effects (or lack of them) of our acts of will, and do not know the causes of our bodily movements, we believe that our acts of will cause our bodily movements. 
- God is the only free cause, because God acts only from the necessity of the divine nature, and so is determined by nothing external (1p17c2 = C 425). Since God is identical to the whole universe, nothing external to God can compel God to act. But Spinoza denies that God has the capacity for opposites, and so he rejects the mediaeval views that allow God to have created something different from what has been created.¹⁰ God cannot do anything different from what actually happens; for such a capacity would commit us to saying that God can make it false that from the nature of a triangle it follows that it has two right angles. Spinoza seems to assert that if we attribute any capacity for opposites to God, we must accept Descartes’s extreme voluntarism, ascribing to God the capacity to make logical necessities false. His assertion is intelligible in the light of his conception of causation. If God has the capacity for opposites, it could have been false that God caused tortoises to exist. But if tortoises were caused to exist, it is logically necessary that tortoises came into being; hence, if God had the power not to cause tortoises, a logically necessary truth could be false. 
- In Spinoza’s view, we should not simply deny that we know we are self-determined; we should also recognize that we are not self-determined, and are therefore not free. God exists necessarily, and acts by the necessity of God’s nature. Everything else exists necessarily because of the necessity of God’s nature.¹⁴ Hence everything follows from facts about the divine nature, which is the nature of the universe as a whole. 
- This does not mean that everything is necessary in the same way. Spinoza leaves room for recognizing a difference that might partly match the ordinary distinction between the necessary and the contingent. Unlike the facts about the divine nature, which are absolutely necessary in their own right, particular events and objects in the universe are not absolutely necessary in their own right, because they depend on the divine nature, and hence on the laws of the universe, and on prior events. Spinoza expresses this feature of contingent (as we might call them) things and events by saying that they are ‘necessary through their causes’, though not in their own right.¹⁵ 
- recognition of things that are not intrinsically necessary suggests a way of reconciling Spinoza with Aquinas on contingency in creation. Aquinas does not believe that if God’s existence is necessary and everything else depends on God, there cannot be any freedom in the world. For, in his view, God creates secondary causes that have a causal role appropriate for their type of agency, and this role allows contingency.¹⁶ We might think that something like this view would be open to Spinoza. But he seems to reject it. modes of the divine nature depend on God both for their existence and for their action.¹⁸ It follows that particular things cannot determine themselves without God, and cannot make themselves undetermined. From this Spinoza takes his proposition about necessity to follow. Aquinas does not claim that secondary causes make themselves undetermined or self-determining. He claims that God makes them and the rest of the universe in such a way that what happens to them depends on their states—sensory or rational. Since they are not necessitated by the rest of the universe apart from their sensory and rational states, they determine things contingently. Spinoza does not argue clearly against this possibility. If his conclusion that things necessarily produce effects in a certain way follows from his claims about God, it does not rule out Aquinas’ view; Aquinas is free to say that God necessarily makes things such that they are necessitated to be secondary causes, and sources of contingent events. 
- In his view, the initial condition, referring to facts about God or the universe as a whole, is absolutely necessary; and he might believe that whatever is necessitated by the absolutely necessary is itself absolutely necessary.¹⁹ It is reasonable, then, given Spinoza’s conception of freedom, for him to believe that facts about causation exclude freedom. 
- Spinoza also rejects compatibilism, because of his rejection of mental causation.²⁰
- Spinoza does not take the initial belief to be entirely false. It is entirely false to believe that the will is causally relevant to bodily movements. But we are right to attribute some mental states to the will; the truth in our initial belief is clear once we reject any distinction between will and intellect.²¹
- We suppose that it is up to us whether something happens, because we believe it does not happen necessarily, and hence independently of our will. But if we knew more about the event that we assume to be up to us, we would recognize that it is necessary, and indeed that we cannot have an adequate idea of it without recognizing its necessity. The appearance that willing is different from assent to a necessary truth is simply the result of our ignorance of the relevant necessity. 
- What knowledge is relevant for dispelling the illusions based on imagination? Spinoza might have two answers. Spinoza may well not distinguish these two answers, because of his conception of causal explanation: 
    - When we recognize that the causes of our action are outside us, we see that the action is not up to us, and we simply assent to it as something that is going to happen. The frist answer assumes that freedom and causal determination by external causes are incompatible. If one rejects this incompatibilist assumption, one need not accept Spinoza’s argument to show that our belief in freedom rests on ignorance of causes. This defence of freedom does not cope with Spinoza’s second answer;
    - When we recognize that it is necessary, we see that it is not up to us, and we assent to it as a necessary truth. for this answer asserts not just that our action is causally determined, but that its occurrence is a necessary truth. He is right to assume that if something is a necessary truth, we are not free to change it. If he believes that causal explanation of an event demonstrates its necessity, he will not admit the possibility of allowing causal determination without necessity. Adequate explanation of my action will show that it is necessary. The appearance of its not being necessary is simply the result of my not having an adequate explanation
- In his view, it is misguided to deplore the emotions and their destructive effects.²² We need to understand them and to see how they are a part of nature.²³ Since the emotions have natural causes, we ought to identify these causes. Since they can also be modified by natural causes, we ought also to find the appropriate causes so that we can modify our emotions in accordance with reason. 
- It is not surprising, in the light of what he has already said, that Spinoza rejects the attitudes of praise and blame that depend on assumptions about freedom, or that he tries to replace these ‘active’ attitudes with the ‘passive’ conditions of knowledge and understanding. We may be surprised, however, that after recommending the passive cognitive attitudes, he re-introduces activity and passivity and recommends the active outlook. How can he do this, if he has already undermined the convictions underlying our conception of agency?
Activity regains a place within Spinoza’s system once he connects the division between activity and passivity with the division between adequate and inadequate ideas. The passions are essentially passive, and are the results of inadequate ideas.²⁴ Since inadequate ideas result from the imagination, and adequate ideas from intellect, passions are products of the imaginative point of view. 
- The inadequate ideas of passion differ from the adequate ideas of intellect insofar as they do not include a grasp of the causes of events. To the imagination, many events appear contingent that will appear necessary if we look at them from the point of view of intellect;
for since intellect grasps their causes, it also grasps their necessity. 
- Instead of causing beliefs about what we ought to do, the growth of adequate knowledge inevitably results, without any further action, in the decay of our passions. 
- Spinoza leaves out this aspect of our intuitive views about freedom and activity, but he assumes that he is still entitled to speak of freedom and activity.
He replaces freedom in action with freedom of mind.²⁷ But he does not abandon freedom of action altogether. Though he denies interaction between mind and body, he allows interaction among mental states. If we restrict ‘action’ to mental interaction, Spinoza allows action guided by reason. If this is the only freedom worth having, it is reasonable of him to claim that he allows us the freedom that is worth having, and that he allows us to be active rather than passive. He believes we can be free of the influence of the passions only if we give up the idea of acting (moving our bodies) for reasons altogether. 
- A passion can be removed only by a stronger and opposite passion 
- Spinoza believes that some version of psychological egoism is correct; each person pursues his own good, because every being essentially tends towards its own continuance.²⁸ We might take him to be referring to a basic desire for one’s own preservation; his statement of the basic ‘striving’ (conatus) may remind us of Aquinas’ claim that all things ‘desire’ (or ‘aim at’, appetunt) being. But such a claim raises some difficulties for Spinoza. 
- His general view is that there are no final causes in nature. In his view, believers in final causes make the future exercise causal influence on the past, in defiance of the real order of causal influence.³⁰ They imagine that this is so in nature because they take nature to be a means of satisfying their own desires, and so they ascribe to nature the ends that they pursue for themselves.³¹ But we have no reason to accept this anthropomorphic conception of nature. On the contrary, desire is prior to belief about goodness.
- Pleasure is a feature of my awareness of states that promote my preservation, and this is the sort of state that I call good.
- So far, Spinoza agrees with the egoistic aspects of Aristotelian ethical theory, once they are re-interpreted to fit his own views about the character of desire. He agrees with Aristotle that human beings necessarily pursue their own good, and he identifies this with happiness. He assumes that the appropriate end for ethics is happiness, and that the dispute is about where it is to be found and how it is to be achieved. He does not say much about the composition of happiness, or about hedonistic, subjectivist, and objectivist conceptions of it. He claims that ‘happiness consists in man’s being able to preserve his being’ (4p18s(i) = C 556). In speaking of happiness as satisfaction (acquiescentia), he seems to treat it as consisting in a state of mind, however it is achieved. 
- How can we acquire the relevant sort of satisfaction? Spinoza believes that we cannot acquire it if our passions dominate us. For passions rest on a naive and misguided view of the world; we think it is worth our while to be angry or resentful at what happens to us, to feel strong attachment to other people or strong dislike of them, and especially to try to change other people and the world for our own advantage. This outlook rests on the assumption that things happen contingently, and hence are up to us to change, and that we know how to change them because we know that our mental states causally affect external reality. Moreover, since our passions result from imagination, they result from superficial views of the world that are liable to vary from person to person. If we look at the same object from different angles, and we do not try to correct our first impressions, it will appear to us that we see different objects. Similarly, different people’s passions fasten on different aspects of the same situation and form different aims. Conflicts result from these different aims, since each person’s passions differentiate him from other people in accordance with his imagination. 
- The condition of people who are dominated by their passions is therefore a Hobbesian state of nature, in which their disagreements in judgment lead to conflicts in action.³⁸ Spinoza agrees with Hobbes’s view that a state of nature is the result of motives that are naturally present in human nature. But he does not agree exactly with Hobbes’s account of why the state of nature is a state of war; his disagreement with Hobbes points to his distinctive view of how to emerge from the state of nature. Hobbes takes both reason and passion to be sources of potential instability and conflict. Our lack of assurance makes it reasonable for us, from the point of view of self-preservation, not to observe the laws of nature in the state of nature. 
- Conflicts arise in the state of nature not because of reason (as Hobbes supposes), but only because of passions, which cause people to act on their partial views of things. But these same passions also tell us that we are better off if we listen to reason, since we dislike the effects of acting on our passions. We turn to reason because it considers the true good of human beings and promises to end conflicts. 
- We need the state, in Spinoza’s view, because of our passions. If we listened to reason, we would be ready to keep promises, avoid deceit and violence, and observe the other Hobbesian laws of nature. We need a state with the power of coercion because of the people who are liable to be swayed by their passions into violating the laws of nature.⁴¹
- - Spinoza’s disagreement with Hobbes partly refelcts his acceptance of the Stoic claim that happiness consists in living in accordance with nature.⁴³ To show how rational perfection is connected to moral virtue, he argues that if we live according to our own nature as rational beings, we live in ways that benefti others as well as ourselves.⁴⁴
- But his main reason for claiming that reason removes conflict rests on his distinction between the partial outlook of the passions and the insight of reason into general laws, giving it a common point of view. 
- The common point of view is common to different people who are guided by reason, since it presents the same conclusions to A and to B; it is free from the distorting influence of the passions that give A and B different points of view on the same situation. But it is also a common point of view because it prescribes whatever is for the common good of A and B.
- Spinoza, however, believes that the ultimate good is essentially non-competitive. The good for a human being consists in ‘an adequate knowledge of God’s eternal and infinite essence’
- he agrees with Aristotle in taking happiness to require intellectual perfectiness.
- Since God is to be identified (speaking approximately) with the laws of nature, we come to know God by acquiring adequate knowledge of the laws of nature, and so understanding why what happens is necessary. This is the point of view of reason, which gets us away from the instability of the emotions. Since this point of view removes the disturbances that arise from domination by the passions, it is the only source of the satisfaction that is needed for happiness. Epicurus was right, therefore, to believe that happiness consists in freedom from disturbance (ataraxia), and that understanding the character of the gods promotes this undisturbed condition. But Spinoza’s account of the understanding that achieves happiness is closer to Aristotle’s conception of theoretical wisdom, grasping the necessary truths about the universe. 
- Spinoza believes that virtue deserves to be chosen for its own sake. He disagrees both with Hobbes, who believes it is worthwhile only for its natural consequences, and with theological moralists who believe it is only worthwhile on the assumption of divine rewards. All those who take an instrumental attitude to moral virtue fail to see that, as Spinoza understands it, it is the greatest happiness. God does not need to reward us for service, since the service of God is happiness itself.⁴⁷ 
- In Spinoza’s view, however, God is incapable of love and of any other affect of joy or sadness, because these affects would be incompatible with God’s perfection
- - He denies any distinction between intellect and will, and in particular he denies it in God. Moreover, he denies that God has an intellect. God’s nature does not allow the appropriate relation between an intellect and its objects; for a divine intellect could not be either posterior or simultaneous to its objects, as an ordinary intellect is. An ordinary intellect achieves knowledge insofar as it is passive, by grasping an object that exists independently of it; that is how it achieves the right direction of fit, by knowing rather than creating an object. But a divine intellect could not grasp its objects in this way; it would have to be prior to everything, since God is the cause of everything (1p17s(ii) = C 427). Since God is so different from any ordinary intellect, Spinoza concludes that intellect, will, and desire and so on, belong to natura naturata, not to natura naturans (1p31 = C 434–5); that is to say, they belong to ‘what follows from the necessity of God’s nature’, and not to ‘God, in so far as he is considered as a free cause’
- The effect of these claims about God and intellect is to curtail the possibility of intellectual love, as Aquinas understands it. For Spinoza in contrast to Aquinas, it is not love directed towards God as a distinct person with intellect, will, and love. The features of distinct personality do not belong to natura naturans, and hence do not belong to God understood in his own right. This does not make intellectual love of God insignificant in Spinoza’s system. Given his doctrine of intellect and will, intellectual love is directed towards adequate knowledge. Knowledge of God is knowledge of the structure and laws of the universe and of their necessity, not of a distinct person. Intellectual love is completely satisfied once we have a complete grasp of the necessary system of the universe. 
- ‘God loving himself’ is not to be understood as love directed towards a distinct person beyond finite persons; for there is no such distinct person. The total system of the universe does not love itself. God’s love of himself must be reduced to love by individual finite persons (who are all modes of God) for finite persons. That is the only sense in which one’s intellectual love can be part of God’s love of himself; it is part of the total of intellectual love present in all the finite persons.⁵⁰ 
- Spinoza’s account of happiness as intuitive knowledge and intellectual love of God helps us to see the good that is revealed by the common point of view of reason. His conception of the good gives him an answer to our earlier objection that the common point of view might reveal a good that is the object of competition. The intuitive knowledge of God is a non-competitive good; if I acquire it, I do not take any of it away from you, and in recognizing it as good for myself I recognize it as good for you also. 
- Spinoza believes that Hobbes would be right if human beings could not reduce domination by passion (4p37sch2 = C 566–7). But he argues that reason can be practical in the ways that Hobbes supposes (4p65–6 = C 583), and he believes that his account of the common good pursued by reason explains how reason can remove Hobbesian confilcts. But it is not clear how this is so, if reason simply turns us towards the knowledge of necessary truths about the universe. 
- Similarly, Spinoza’s conception of intellectual love makes it difficult to see how an appeal to intellectual love could help him at the points where his ethical doctrines are open to question. For even if we restrict it to other finite persons, and do not extend it to God, it is not directed to their characters or personalities or (as we normally conceive them) their interests. It must be confined to assent to the same necessary truths as they are grasped by other finite minds besides our own. If I assent to your grasping the laws of thermodynamics, and in that sense have intellectual love for you, it does not follow that I will enjoy your company, or care about your being free of pain or deprivation.










#                  Difficulties

- conception of my mental states as merely epiphenomenal states of awareness of physical states ftis Spinoza’s attack on ordinary assumptions about agency. But it does not completely fit his views about mind and body; for our comparison with the television implies causal interaction between physical states (of the assembly line or brain) and states of awareness. On Spinoza’s view, connecting causation with necessity, this direction of causation from body to mind is no less unintelligible than the direction that goes from the mind to the body. He does not explain how he can avoid some sort of causation in his claims about objects and ideas. But since this direction of causation is not the most important one for claims about agency, we need not pursue this objection to his position; we can concentrate on the other direction of causation. 
- Some of his attacks seem to be directed at the conviction that choices and decisions are free. We might take him to mean that our false beliefs about freedom reflect ignorance of the causes of our mental states; if that is all he means, he need not deny that the mental states cause bodily movements. But if this were all Spinoza meant, he would not have argued for his more sweeping claim that ‘the body cannot determine the mind to thinking, and the mind cannot determine the body to motion, to rest, or to anything else’. When we discover how ignorant we are, we should also admit that we have no good reason to make dogmatic claims about the effects of our mental states, or about the explanatory role of their intentional content. Hence we ought not to assert dogmatically that the body is incapable of producing the relevant events by itself, since we do not know how much the body is capable of by itself. Since we are ignorant of how the mind moves the body, we ought not to assert that it moves the body. The argument from ignorance is open to question. We might concede that we are sometimes wrong in claiming that our intentions cause our actions, and that they do not cause actions except through a physical process that we are unaware of or do not know in detail. But this does not give us a good reason to doubt that we sometimes know that we act because we intend to act. I do not know everything about how my pressing the accelerator pedal causes a car to move forward, and it is logically possible that the car is really controlled by a computer that is also linked to my brain; perhaps the computer both moves the car forward and depresses the accelerator when I decide to press it, but my deciding to depress the accelerator is entirely epiphenomenal in relation to the movement of the car. But though it is logically possible that all the states of my brain are related to my intentions and my actions in this indirect way, we should not take this logical possibility seriously. We have no reason to believe it, and we have no reason to abandon our initial conviction that the content of my intention to raise my arm is causally relevant to my raising my arm. He argues that since we are sometimes wrong about mental causation, it is logically possible that we are always wrong, and hence we never know, and are never justifeid in believing, that any mental events explain any bodily events on any occasion. This is a Cartesian form of sceptical argument; it seems to exaggerate the significance of logical possibility. 
- Spinoza introduces this question implicitly, in stating the common beliefs about mental causation. His opponent mentions paintings, buildings, and temples as cases where we need mental causation. Spinoza replies that we are too ignorant to be entitled to rule out the possibility of purely physical causation of these events; but this reply does not seem to grasp the main point of the objection. Suppose that we knew enough about marble, mules, ropes, beams, human physiology, and so on, to explain the events that resulted in the existence of the Parthenon and St Paul’s Cathedral, without reference to any human intentions or aims. This is difficult to conceive, but even if we could conceive it, would such an explanation explain the existence of a temple and a cathedral? Temples and cathedrals are similar in some respects (as religious buildings), and different in others (since the Parthenon was intended to house a statue of Athena, whereas St Paul’s was build for a congregation and for the bishop’s chair). In some respects—external appearance—St Paul’s is more similar to the Parthenon than to Notre Dame de Paris, but in other respects—as a Christian cathedral church—it is more similar to Notre Dame. It is difficult to see how we could understand or explain the relevant respects of difference and similarity. So, We might concede to Spinoza that a complete physiological non-mental explanation could be found for all the physical events that happen when I go for a walk or sign a cheque. But such an explanation does not explain why I go for a walk or sign a cheque.
- even if we concede Spinoza’s claim that we cannot distinguish idea from volition in this particular instance, we may not agree that all volitions can be treated in the same way. My volition to write a cheque may be understood as my assenting to its being good to write a cheque here and now. This assent depends on my having the idea of its being good to write a cheque here and now, and on my having the idea of a cheque and the idea of good. But none of these ideas seems to involve my assenting to its being good to write a cheque. Spinoza, therefore, seems to have generalized inappropriately from an untypical example. 
- This case for the identifciation of intellect and will has the advantages and disadvantages of several of Spinoza’s arguments. On the one hand, his most surprising claims about agency and freedom are defensible, indeed unavoidable, within his metaphysical system. On the other hand, the elements of his metaphysical system that support his claims about freedom are quite disputable. Many apparent objections to Spinoza collapse if we accept his views about causation, explanation, and necessity; but these views do not seem so obviously true that we ought to withdraw all our doubts about his views on agency. 
- We might try to defend Spinoza by arguing that adequate knowledge gives us a reason and a motive to try to moderate our passions, once we recognize that they have so far depended on false beliefs and now depend on false appearances. But a deliberate effort to moderate our passions rests on a false assumption about agency. Moreover, the assumption is not only false, but it conflicts with the main point of Spinoza’s claims about adequate knowledge. He rejects the aim of deliberately modifying the passions; that aim depends on the mistaken belief in freewill. A passion can be removed only by a stronger and opposite passion (4p7dem). Changes in the passions follow, without any further intervention of the will, from adequate knowledge of the necessary connexions in the world.
- Spinoza’s claims about the passions overlook the attitude of the ancient Sceptics. Sextus agrees with Spinoza, for different reasons, that we have no reason for acting in one way rather than another. He infers that we will give up acting on considerations that seem rational to us. But he does not infer that we will be free of passions. For even if passions include false beliefs or rely on them, recognition of the falsity of the beliefs does not imply the end of the passion. Even if we agree with Spinoza, and decide that we cannot respond as free agents to the contingencies of the world, our passions may not follow this conclusion. It is not clear, therefore, how the mental freedom that Spinoza describes will necessarily result in the modification of the passions. 
- We might be tempted to say that our desire for self-preservation is our awareness of states that result in our self-preservation, and that in general we can refer to the actual result of our bodily movement to identify the character of our desire. But this account of desire does not cope with the fact that someone’s desire for self-preservation may also explain (as we suppose) actions that do not result in his self-preservation, but seem to him to be likely to result in it. The relevant movements are those that are directed towards self-preservation, and we cannot identify these except by reference to their intentional character and aim. If Spinoza adheres strictly to his ban on teleological explanation, he should apparently allow a desire for F only in cases where F is really achieved. This restricted appeal to desire limits the role of desire in explaining action.
A non-teleological reconstruction of desire also raises doubts about the universality of the desire for self-preservation. Since we all succeed in preserving ourselves for some time, Spinoza can consistently claim that we all act on the desire for self-preservation. But he also seems to treat this as a universal desire on all occasions.³² Since we do not preserve ourselves on all occasions, it is not clear how the desire can be universal. If Spinoza claims that we all try to preserve ourselves even when we fail, he re-introduces a teleological concept. If he tries to remove the teleological content from trying, and replaces it with a mere tendency, he raises the difficulty about unsuccessful action again.
It is not clear, therefore, how much is left of the ‘striving’ (conatus) that Spinoza attributes to all human beings, once we remove the teleological content that conflicts with his metaphysics.
- Some of Spinoza’s views about the nature of desire affect his claims about the relation of desire and goodness. We might suppose that the desire for self-preservation rests, as Aquinas claims, on an assumption about goodness; in desiring something we see it in a particular light, in relation to other things that we count as good and worthy of desire, and that is why we try to get it. These intentional concepts do not fit Spinoza’s attitude to teleology, and so he does not try to explain desire by reference to goodness. 
-  - It is diffciult, however, to see why Spinoza supposes that a point of view that is shared by different people will necessarily prescribe a common good. Suppose, for instance, that reason tells us that each person needs to eat 3 kg of food per day to stay alive. Since this is true of everyone, reason tells A that each of A, B, and C, needs to eat 3 kg per day; and it tells B and C the same thing. Hence they can agree on its being good for each person to eat 3 kg. But if there are only 3 kg available to divide, the ‘common’ conclusion that each person ought to eat 3 kg does not tell anyone what to do; still less does it say what policy it will be good for everyone to adopt. In this respect, reason does not seem to present a common good; the good that it presents does not remove competition between individuals. One might say that the competition is only contingent, resulting from the lack of resources; but contingent competition is enough for Hobbes’s argument about the state of nature to get started. 
- Spinoza does not argue convincingly for his claim that knowledge of God is the whole of the human good. If we really thought that it is all that matters, we seem to have no reason to secure the more mundane goods for other people or for ourselves. The aspect of Spinoza’s outlook that introduces a non-competitive good also curtails one’s concern for the goods and evils that are normally taken to matter in inter-personal relations. 
- Aristotle believes that the self-love of the virtuous person is also directed to the common good of rational agents, because each person recognizes himself as essentially rational. We have considered some of the objections that arise against Aristotle’s use of these claims, and some of the replies that might be offered in his defence. Spinoza adds his own distinctive argument, in claiming that the point of view of reason removes the passions that produce conflict.⁵¹ Enlightened people will not only be free of the competitive aspects of the emotions, but will also seek to co-operate with others. This argument is open to question. If Spinoza’s claims about the emotions are correct, we can see why enlightenment about the emotions will result in a less competitive attitude. But one might also suppose it will result in a less co-operative attitude as well. The emotions produce concern for others, since we believe we can (for instance) do something to relieve the sufferings of others. If we lose this belief in our agency, and we are less disturbed by grief at the sufferings of others, why should we still be concerned about their welfare? If the universal point of view resulting from adequate knowledge removes any bias in favour of myself, should we not also expect it to remove concern for others? If I am indifferent to others, and I also recognize that from the universal point of view I matter no more than others do, why should I not also become indifferent to myself? Co-operation requires not only removal of bias towards myself, but also positive concern for others. Spinoza does not explain why we will develop this positive impartial concern simply by acquiring an impartial point of view. 