- St Paul accepts the same perfectionist understanding of the point of the moral law. The tenth commandment of the Decalogue is different from the others in so far as it prohibits desires rather than actions.⁷¹ In explaining his inability to keep the law, Paul takes this commandment rather than the other nine for his example, suggesting that the commandment itself gives an opportunity to sin.⁷² To support his case, he interprets the commandment quite broadly. The commandment prohibits inappropriate desire for anything that belongs to one’s neighbour, understanding this as a desire to harm one’s neighbour. I covet my neighbour’s car by wanting to steal his battered Ford, but I do not—apparently—violate the commandment if I want a battered Ford, or if I want a new Lexus in order to humiliate him when I park it next to his battered Ford. A moderate and realistic interpretation of the commandment might say: Given that you desire honour, wealth, status, and superiority, don’t take this desire so far that you try to steal from your neighbour. Paul, however, assumes a more extreme and perfectionist understanding of the commandment, taking it to prohibit all ‘coveting’, and hence all inappropriate desire. The contrast between the moderate and the extreme interpretation of the commandment makes it easier to see why Paul supposes that the law gives sin its opportunity. The moderate interpretation takes it for granted that we have inappropriate desires for wealth and domination, and simply tells us not to go as far as attempts to dispossess our neighbour. But if this is all the commandment says, it permits the inappropriate desires that might encourage us to steal from our neighbour. But if the point of the commandment is to prescribe proper consideration for our neighbour, ought it not to prohibit the more general desire (say) to get the better of my neighbour, and to prohibit the inappropriate desires that make his possessions seem attractive to us? This argument supports the extreme interpretation that takes the commandment to prohibit all coveting.
- Paul accepts the extreme interpretation when he introduces the command to love one’s neighbour. He follows Jesus in treating this command as a summary of the law.⁷³ But he agrees with Jesus (on the Good Samaritan) in taking love of one’s neighbour to extend to everyone. We fulf i l law by loving ‘another’ (ton heteron), not simply by loving our neighbour and hating our enemy. If we claim that the commandments are summed up in the commandment to love one’s neighbour, we might mean (1) that all it takes to love our neighbour, in the relevant sense, is to avoid murder, adultery, etc., or (2) that the fulf i lment of the commandments involves nothing less than the universal love of other people. Paul clearly intends the second claim.
- we might suppose that St Paul’s frequent contrast between ‘f l esh’ and ‘spirit’ expresses a radical dualist doctrine. Such a doctrine treats a human being as a combination of two distinct quasi-personal agents that are moved by sharply distinct motives, and have no basis for agreement on shared principles to guide their action. Some passages in Plato’s Republic might be taken to support such a view. Though we have found reasons to doubt this interpretation of the Republic, it might appear to express a version of Platonic dualism that f i ts Pauline dualism. When Paul claims that the f l esh and the spirit have conf l icting desires, we might take him to maintain a basically anti-Socratic psychological and metaphysical dualism.
- His claims provide no basis for a strongly dualist conception. Flesh and spirit are not two distinct agents.
The outlook of the f l esh is our outlook when we reject the spirit of the moral law in favour of the various aims that seem to us (rightly or wrongly) to conf l ict with it. The outlook of the spirit is our outlook when we are guided by the Holy Spirit so that we guide our action in accordance with the aims of the moral law. Paul does not prescribe an ascetic outlook for Christian believers in general. He does not treat the motives that sometimes oppose the moral law as being fundamentally opposed to it. We can harmonize them with the demands of love for our neighbour if we interpret those demands appropriately and form the realistic hope of fulfilling them.
- While Paul certainly does not endorse the modif i ed Socratic attitude of the Stoics, his views can readily be expressed within their conception of will and passion. If we use the resources that the Stoics allow themselves in their discussion of the attractive and potentially deceptive character of appearances, we can explain what Paul means by speaking of the persistent inf l uence of the f l esh.
- St Paul suggests that we recognize what the law requires of us and recognize that it is good, but reject it none the less. Since rejection belongs to the will, the will seems to reject the apparently greater good.