# Authors

Horgan and Timmons

# Predecessor

Hare’s Missionaries and Cannibals argument

# Definition

Suppose there is some Earth-2 where lives some rational creatures. And suppose, that we have consequentional moral and they have anti-consequentional moral. Is it right to translate their `wrong` and our `wrong`?

Horgan and Timmons themselves think the thought experiment favors a  version of expressivism. They note that the feature our translations treat as  crucial for sameness of meaning for moral terms is that they guide action.  This is just the feature that Hare took to be crucial to translating missionary  talk into cannibal talk even when the two groups approved of difefrent things.  If it is this shared feature that explains the (alleged) sameness of meaning  for the terms on the two planets the terms cannot have a representational  semantics, or so Horgan and Timmons argue. 

They thus join Hare in rejecting minimal realism about morality for just the same reason.
They reject a  representational semantics on the basis of a translation argument. That rejection on the basis of the Moral Twin-Earth argument commits them to  thinking it works against all representational semantic accounts for moral  terms. And this is in fact what they argue, as we’ll see in the next chapter. 

# Against what

Boyd’s causal regulation  semantics is the theory that the Moral Twin-Earth argument was designed  to refute. 

# Counter argument

Direct reference naturalists may well just want to bite the bullet here. As  Janice Dowell (2015) points out, it isn’t obvious that we must regard our  reactions to the thought experiment as providing reliable information about  moral semantics. If the direct reference theories targeted by the experiment  are correct, our responses may not be evidence about the referent of our  terms. For it is part of direct reference theory that we can refer to something  without knowing much about it. 

On the other hand, many of us find it  hard to believe that there is not a genuine disagreement about morality  dividing the disputants on Earth and Moral Twin-Earth. And it does seem  hard to hang onto that thought without also thinking it due in part to the  meanings of the terms in question. 

Externalist realists might resist that  thought. For example, they can try to explain the persistent suspicion that  the two do disagree using pragmatic mechanisms of communication. 

Or they might suggest there is some sort of shared presupposition in play when people use moral vocabulary and that the disagreement is generated by the conjunction of these commitments and what people in fact say when they  use moral terms. For example, perhaps in both communities, people use  moral terms only when they think moral claims relevant to practical deliberation over what to do. If so, calling something ‘right,’ either on Earth or  on Moral Twin-Earth, will carry with it a commitment to whatever it is that  ‘right’ applies to, even when this is not part of the meaning/semantics of the term. Two people might then find themselves in practical conflict when  one affirms and another denies that some action is “right.” And that would  remain true even if the term ‘right’ picks out a different property in each  of their mouths.