- Hedonism compatible with common beliefs
- Hedonism explains common beliefs
- If virtuous people will be punishedbin afteelife, we would face a conflict between morality and self-interest. Mill claims that in the face of such a conflict, he would choose morality and face eternal punishment for it
- non-instrumental concern is compatible with hedonism. The previous association between a place or an activity or a person and instrumental benef i t leading to pleasure causes us to form a non-instrumental preference. This is how Mill explains the outlook of a miser who comes to care about money for its own sake, or the music-lover who comes to care about music for its own sake after having cared about it only for the sake of instrumental benefits
- In connecting utilitarianism with morality, the voluntarists do not decide between two ways of understanding the connexion; (1) We might argue that since we have reliable convictionsabout what ismorally right, andsinceutilitarianism istrue, ourmoral convictions should guide us in deciding what promotes utility. (2) Alternatively, we might argue that our convictions about what promotes utility should guide and modify our convictions about moral rightness.
Each of these directions of argument might be appropriate in different circumstances.
But unless the second is sometimes appropriate, we will not learn much about morality by connecting it with utility. Mill accuses the theological voluntarists of holding the first view, and therefore of holding a conservative view of utility.²⁹ His criticism of Paley on this point is justified. But the view of earlier utilitarians is not so clear. If they take the first view, relying on other moral judgments to decide questions about utility, their attitude is ‘conservative’ insofar as it tends to hold moral convictions fixed in estimates of utility. But it is not necessarily thereby ‘conservative’ in a social and political sense. If we believe an institution is (say) unjust, this first form of utilitarianism does not allow us to change our mind by reflexion on utility; hence it rejects a utilitarian device for reconciling ourselves to existing institutions. The utilitarian attitude is socially conservative only if it both estimates rightness by utility and estimates utility by the standard of prevailing practices and institutions