# Terms

- Selective value = we need to choose it
- Good = selective value + our control
- Happiness = set of all goods
- Virtue is good
- External goods havd selective value
- Virtue = deliberate about which ways of maximizing external goods are benefit for community
- Appearances - rush assent that something is a Good
- Friendship - when one man influences other man's rational deliberation

# Positions

- Compatibilism is true
- Reciprocity of the virtues - each virtue requires each of the others
- Virtues not only necessary for happiness, but also are sufficient for happiness
- Excercizing Wisdom (Rational Control) = Happiness
- Rational Control is non-Instrumentally Good
- Virtue = Rational Control => Virtue is non-Instrumentally Good.
- Knowledge is sufficient for acting
- The Naturalism is true. Human functionis to be guided by practical reason
- Concept of assent
- We will accept some priority in justif i cation if we take virtuous actions to be justif i ed primarily as the product of virtues, and do not take virtues to be justif i ed primarily as the source of virtuous actions. But this claim about priority seems to be open to objection. If we have no independent reason to care about the actions resulting from the virtues, but we claim that the virtues are organized for the production of these actions, what reason have we to value the virtues? Critics of the Stoics often raise this objection
- Pain is not bad at all
- Stoics, like Skeptics, value tranquillity, but while Skeptics say that every tranquillity is happiness, stoics think that only proper tranquillity, achieved by a proper way, is the happiness
- Criticise Skeptics: When they say that the Sceptic will be inactive, they do not mean that he will be immobile, or that he will lack goal-directed behaviour. They mean that his goal-directed behaviour will not be rational action.
- Determinism is true. In one of the Stoics’ examples, the action of felling the oak on Mount Pelion is suff i cient, in a deterministic universe, for Medea’s killing of her children.
- They are compatibilist aka soft determinists - determinism is compatible with free will
- They criticise Epicurus' argument against determinism by claiming that causes are more complex
- The growth of non-instrumental concern for practical reason is a result of the instrumental use of practical reason
- The three major Stoics are Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus
- Still, even though health is not good and illness is not bad, we have good reason to try to be healthy rather than ill. That is why health is a ‘preferred’ indifferent, and illness is a ‘non-preferred’ indifferent.
- The Stoics recognize an ultimate end for rational action, and they follow Aristotle in identifying the end with happiness.¹¹ They also agree with Aristotle in taking happiness to include all and only genuine goods; for they take their claim that ‘only the f i ne is good’ to be equivalent to the claim that virtue is self-suff i cient for happiness
- They do not endorse the extreme moralist view that the requirements of moral virtue and of rightness require agents to act against their happiness or to act without regard to their happiness
- They emphasize the coherence and connexion in their philosophy as a whole
- Prwffered indifferences = external goods
- The Stoics believe that the universe is governed by a divine providential intelligence, aiming at the good of the whole and of each part.
- The Stoics believe that in promoting the good of the whole we promote our own good
- My thought: for Stoics, only actions that are in your controll are the one that matters
- Nothing can harm virtuous man
- Even before agents are guided by explicit preconceptions, their desires are more than a collection of impulses aimed at unconnected satisfactions. They are linked by a common concern for the agent as a whole, conceived as a continuing self. Though the Stoics agree that agents without explicit reason have no explicit conception of themselves as continuing agents, a non-explicit conception of themselves explains the system and co-ordination in their desires. Once we see this system, we cannot suppose that the pleasure of satisfying particular desires is all that they care about for its own sake.
- At an early stage, human beings are like other animals; their appearances include an attractive element, so that if something appears pleasant (etc.), it thereby excites impulse and produces action. Later, however, we acquire the capacity to assent to our appearances and to dissent from them. Our appearances do not change their character; the things that appeared pleasant still appear pleasant, and are therefore still attractive, but we no longer follow them without question. We do not follow them until we assent. Assent is not simply a further appearance directed to the initial appearance. If we formed a tendency to accept or to welcome some appearances and to reject others, we would have what Hume calls a ‘lively idea’. But this is not what the Stoics identify with assent. They argue that whereas appearance is passive, and depends on the environment, assent is active. Appearance is involuntary, and assent is voluntary and depends on our judgment. Assent implies ‘conviction’ or ‘persuasion, which the Sceptic avoids.
- When we begin to assent, we are used to having appearances that have moved us to action by themselves.
These same appearances are still strongly suggestive, and we tend to assent to them.⁴⁹ This sort of assent ‘yields’ to appearances (Plu. SR 1056f = LS 41E; 1057a = LS 53S), and results in an ‘affection’ or ‘passion’ (pathos). A passion is an ‘immediate’ or ‘fresh’ assent that consists in yielding to an appearance that some natural advantage or disadvantage is good or evil.⁵⁰ In immediate assents we yield to our first appearances of how things are. Sometimes we yield immediately because the appearance comes on us suddenly and without preparation.
- In saying that we yield to appearances, the Stoics seek to explain and to correct the common assumption that the passions are ways of being affected rather than ways of acting.
They do not accept this assumption, since they identify a passion with an immediate assent, and all assent is active. Neither animals nor young children have passions,⁵³ because they act on appearance alone, whereas rational agents act on appearance only after assenting to it. When we act on passion, we act on minimal assent, since we fail to interfere with or to question the suggestion that the appearance makes.
By insisting that passion involves assent, the Stoics implicitly deny that we can act on our passions against all our beliefs.⁵⁴ If we seem to act against our beliefs, we really have wavering or oscillating beliefs; though we act against some of our beliefs, we act on other beliefs.⁵⁵ Similarly, passions cannot persist without the relevant beliefs about good and bad.⁵⁶ The passions that the Stoics identify with immediate assents include anger, fear, lust, and all the others that Plato and Aristotle ascribe to the non-rational parts of the soul.
- The Stoics argue that passions belong to the rational part of Platonic trinite soul, because they all assent to the action as good overall.
- Where common sense thinks it sees a conf l ict between rational assent and passion, the Stoics see wavering and vacillation between two conf l icting rational assents resting on conf l icting beliefs about what is best.
- Some sources quote passages in which Chrysippus seems to recognize the non-rational character of (for instance) anger, and our tendency to persist in it even when we recognize that we ought not to.⁵⁸
- Chrysippus believes that he can both recognize the apparently non-rational character of passions and still maintain his analysis of them as assents. In his view, the non-rational aspect of the passion is present in the appearance that underlies it. The suggestiveness of the appearance—the feature of it that makes it easy for us to yield to it in our assent—is a product of our experience, and (in many cases) of our upbringing and our interaction with other people. Plato and Aristotle are right, therefore, to say that passions are sometimes diff i cult to resist, but they are wrong about what resistance involves, and about what happens when we fail to resist them.
- In their view, the allegedly incontinent action in these cases is action on assent, since it is a voluntary action; and if it is an action on assent, the agent judges that the action is best, all things considered. This description of incontinence seems to differ sharply from Aristotle’s conception of incontinence as failure to follow my rational judgment of what is better on the whole. But Aristotle concedes a point to the Stoics; for he does not think it is possible to know that x is rationally preferable to y and, at the same time as one knows this, to choose and to do y rather than x. Incontinent people, in his view, lose their grasp of the true principles whenever they act incontinently. (EN 1147b9–17). In admitting that ignorance must be part of any explanation of incontinence, Aristotle seems to accept the central Stoic claim.
- If I assent unwisely to an appearance, I am hasty or careless in assuming that the weight of evidence favours its truth.
In these cases, my assent to the appearance rests on a judgment about its relation to my other beliefs about available evidence.
- Even impulsive people assent when they yield to their appearances; their outlook and values inf l uence the sorts of appearances that they will give way to, even though they do not usually attend explicitly or ref l ectively to the relevant considerations. The mere fact that the appearance suggests that revenge (for instance) is good does not explain why we seek revenge; for not all agents who have appearances suggesting this also yield to the appearance. Whether or not we yield to the appearance also depends on our more general and ref l ective values; if they permit us to yield to this sort of appearance, then we yield to it, and otherwise we do not yield to it.
- Their theory embraces compatibilism and soft determinism. They accept causal determinism for reasons connected with their natural philosophy and natural theology; determinism is part of their doctrine of fate (or ‘destiny’, heimarmenˆ e). To show that freedom is compatible with Stoic determinism, they defend a division between different types of causes, and then argue that the causal role they assign to assent is exactly the role that is needed for freedom and responsibility. The distant past includes an ‘antecedent’ cause of every effect, but it does not include the principal cause. Similarly, it provides necessary conditions for an event. But neither the antecedent cause nor the necessary conditions are the ‘principal’ cause. Though an antecedent cause may make an event inevitable, it does not explain why it happens. To explain an event, we must connect the antecedent causes with the cause that more directly explains the event; this cause is the principal cause. Being a principal cause is a non-transitive relation, whereas being an antecedent cause is transitive. The Stoics connect these claims about causation with their claims about assent by claiming that the principal cause of a rational agent’s action is the agent’s assent. It is the principal cause of Othello’s action because Othello’s assent explains why he acts on an appearance that someone else might have had without acting on it.
- The Stoics believe that our assent is open to inf l uence by rational evaluation, and that praise and blame are forms of rational evaluation, pointing out reasons for and against an action that are appropriately taken into account by an agent who considers whether to assent to an appearance that suggests doing the action. If praise and blame were not concerned with reasons, but were simply expressions of favourable and aversive reactions, or if assent were not inf l uenced by reasons, but only by causal processes immune to reasons, the Stoics would lose the basis for their claim that actions caused by assents are proper objects of praise and blame.
- But they defend their position by pointing out that we can be praised and blamed for having particular passions and for acting on them
- Their arguments against the Sceptics show that they believe assent is not determined by appearances.⁸⁸ In assenting to a perceptual appearance, we are capable of some rational response to evidence and reasons, whether or not they correspond to our most vivid appearance. Similarly, in assenting to an appearance that something is good, we are capable of considering the merits of the appearance and of other appearances apart from their strength and vividness.
- One might suppose that there could be many different consistent and incompatible plans. But the Stoics do not refer to mere consistency; for they do not agree that all consistent plans equally achieve an agent’s good. In their view, the good is not just living consistently, but living in agreement with nature. Our initial impulses give us a natural preference for health over sickness, for relief of hunger over starvation, and so on. The task of practical reason is not simply to devise some internally consistent plan that prevents these impulses from undermining each other. When the Stoics introduce agreement with nature, they reject a subjective conception of one’s good.
- The Stoics take the end to be ‘living with understanding of the things that come about by nature, choosing those that are in accord with nature and rejecting the contrary things’. But ut does not mean that happiness consists in achieving the natural advantages, and virtue is to be valued as a means to achieving happiness.
- To capture the relation between virtue and the result it seeks to achieve, the Stoics distinguish ‘stochastic’ (i.e., ‘aiming’) from non-stochastic crafts. Their distinction rests on a division between the end (f i nis, telos) and the objective (propositum, prokeimenon) of an action or craft. The end is the faultless exercise of the craft, whereas the objective is the external result that this faultless exercise tries to achieve:
    - Non-stochastic craft, such as arithmetic, the achievement of the end of the craft (which is the faultless exercise of the craft), is sufficient for achieving the objective. If we add or subtract, but get the wrong answer, we must have made a mistake in the exercise of the craft and failed to achieve its end
    - Stochastic - we can achieve the end without achieving the objective. Even if our exercise of the craft is faultless, we may still miss the target; perhaps the wind blew it over or someone moved it. A virtue is similar to a stochastic craft, in so far as it has an objective (achieving the natural advantages) and an end (doing all we can to achieve the natural advantages), and achieving the end is not sufficient for achieving the objective. Virtuous action, therefore, is not sufficient for achieving the life according to nature, which includes the natural advantages.
- Stoics agree with Aristotle in believing that virtuous action is its own end. Though virtue is a stochastic craft, the objective (output) that it pursues is not its end; the end, as Aristotle believes, is virtuous action itself. Virtuous action is the realization of practical reason, and it consists in doing what we reasonably can to secure the natural advantages (external goods that are in accordance with virtuoues). If appropriate action implied success in getting a preferred indifferent (its objective), sages would not take it as their end; for we cannot expect that our efforts to gain preferred indifferents will always succeed, and we ought not even to think directly about external success when we make our choices.⁵⁸ But in saying that, the Stoics make it clear why sages take appropriate action as their end. We can give a reasonable defence of an action even if it turned out to have bad results, as long as we can show that we could not reasonably be expected to foresee them, and that the action was reasonable in the light of what we could reasonably be expected to foresee. Since virtuous people value practical reason for its own sake, and regard the exercise of practical reason in acting reasonably (eulogistein)⁵⁹ as the end of virtuous action, their distinctive success consists in their achievement of the relevant end, not in achievement of the objective that determines the character of the end:
    ```python
    Non-Stochastic Craft:
    Good_excercise --> Objective
    
    
    Stochastic Craft:
    Good_excercise ----v
                      Objective
    Fortune -----------^
    
    
    Virtue as Stochastic craft:
           .--.
           |  v
    Virtuous_Action ---v
                      Natural_advantages
    Fortune -----------^
    ```
- If craftsmen tried to adapt their practice to fit all possible external hazards, they would guess wrongly and come out worse than they would have if they had just aimed at the appropriate exercise of skill in the craft. 
- The features of the product determine what counts as skill in the craft. The expert’s deliberation requires thought about the objective of the craft; this thought about the objective forms our conception of the end, which is the action that constitutes the best exercise of the craft.
- The content of the virtues is determined by the natural advantages that they try to secure.
- In this case as in others, I discover that I value x for itself by f i nding that I prefer x and y together over y without x. If I valued x only as a means to y, I would be satisf i ed if I got y by means of z rather than x (if z is an equally eff i cient means to y). I prefer to achieve my objectives by rational planning, rather than to achieve them by some other equally eff i cient means; hence I do not value practical reason simply as an instrumental means; hence I attach non-instrumental value to it.
- It would be irrational for me to give up the exercise of reason for the sake of some specif i c objective. For the value of the objective is its value for me, and as I become self-conscious I become aware of myself as an essentially rational agent. If I ceased to be a rational agent, I would cease to exist, and any objective I would have gained by doing so would no longer be valuable for me, but only for the non-rational agent who would replace me.
- ‘living with understanding of the things that come about by nature, choosing those that are in accord with nature and rejecting the contrary things’.¹⁹ We might have understood this as a description of how to achieve the end, so that the end, strictly speaking, would be the possession or enjoyment of the natural advantages rather than the activity of choosing them. But now we see that the Stoics intend to refer precisely to the activity of rational choosing. They see non-instrumental value in the practical reason that is exercised in choosing the appropriate natural advantages, not only in the successful results of our choice.
- Since the Stoics are eudaemonists, they believe that if virtue has non-instrumental value, the final good includes virtue as a component.
- If we take the final good to be unconnected with virtue, and so measure it by our own advantage, and not by f i neness, we cannot consistently cultivate friendship, justice, generosity, or bravery.
- Any conception of the final good that leaves out f i neness demotes the virtues to a purely instrumental status that conf l icts with the outlook of the virtuous person (Cic. F. ii 35).
- This belief about the virtues is reasonable because the virtues are manifestations of practical reason.
- They insist that the different recognized virtues are possible only for someone who thinks virtue suff i cient for happiness.
- The good requires living in agreement with nature; virtuous people do this because they live in agreement with reason, which they have naturally come to value most.
- A second argument maintains that our life is happy if and only if we can be proud of it, and that this is true only if we live finely (iii 28).
- The Stoics admit that we pursue some of external goods for their own sakes, and they recognize that this pursuit is the natural and reasonable result of conciliation.
- They recognize different sorts of indifferents (external goods):
    - Pure indifferents give us no reason from any point of view to prefer them. 
    - The natural advantages that are the initial objects of a creature’s desire are not pure indifferents. Both they and their contraries are indifferent in relation to happiness, since they are neither parts of happiness nor instrumental means to it. We have reason to prefer the natural advantages because they promote a life in accord with nature; though they are indifferent towards happiness, they are not indifferent towards life in accord with nature. We have reason to select health rather than illness, when these are the options we face, and this is a complete description of the practically relevant features of the situation.⁵⁰ They are not choiceworthy, because we are not justif i ed in choosing them without qualif i cation; this unqualified choice, in all situations and irrespective of the price to be paid in natural disadvantages, is reasonable only for virtue
- Whatever the point of the doctrine of indifferents may be, it is not intended to detach us from concern for indifferents; if the Stoics had intended to do that, they would not have attributed non-instrumental value to some preferred indifferents, and they would not have said that they contribute to the life in accord with nature.
- In refusing to extend happiness this far, they reject Aristotle’s belief that happiness is comprehensive (includes all goods)
- Stoic view, an action in accordance with one virtue is also in accordance with all the other virtues, but the virtuous person is not always exercising his bravery or temperance. To show that a virtuous person’s action must always accord with all the virtues, the Stoics distinguish primary and secondary subject-matters.⁶⁹ While each virtue has its own primary subject-matter, its secondary subject-matter extends to all the other virtues. That is why sages act justly every time they act temperately. To see what the Stoics mean by taking every virtue to be somehow present in every virtuous action, we may return to their claim that virtuous people’s action is ‘complete’ appropriate action that achieves ‘all the measures’, and that they choose the reasonable action because it is reasonable. The Stoics follow Aristotle in believing that a bank robber who carries out a dangerous raid without fear or hesitation is not really doing a brave action, whereas a soldier who did the same (from one point of view) type of action in a just war would be doing a brave action. The brave person faces the danger because it is required by a just cause; if the cause were not just, the brave person would recognize this and would not face the danger. Similarly, virtuous people perform other virtuous actions on the assumption that they are required or permitted by the other virtues. Their performance of a virtuous and successful action is marked by the counterfactuals that are true of them, so that they would act differently if their allegedly brave action were prohibited by justice, and so on.
- According to Seneca, some Aristotelian external goods provide a wide f i eld for several virtues, whereas poverty leaves room only for endurance; others add enjoyment to life. Sages prefer both sorts of advantages as non-instrumentally valuable.⁷⁰ Preferred indifferents that do not hinder virtue deserve our concern because they are in accord with nature, not because they are good.⁷¹ The only genuine good in the pursuit of preferred indifferents is the exercise of good judgment in selecting them, but this is not the only reason for trying to get them.
- A sage tries to raise the level of preferred indifferents, as long as this is consistent with the demands of virtue, and tries to avoid a major loss of preferred indifferents, within the constraints imposed by virtue.
- They believe that external conditions can deteriorate far enough to justify a sage in committing suicide. Their reason for committing suicide cannot be that they have lost, or are about to lose, necessary conditions for being happy. Their decision to commit suicide is influenced by the actual or threatened loss of preferred indifferents for themselves or for people they care about.
- They claim: (1) Virtue has selective value. (2) Preferred indifferents have selective value. (3) Virtue is not suff i cient for getting the preferred indifferents, since the ‘success’ of a virtuous action consists in its complete appropriateness (perfectum off i cium), not in the external success of achieving the objective of getting preferred indifferents (Cic. F. iii 59 = LS 59F). (4) Virtue together with preferred indifferents has no greater selective value than virtue alone (iii 45; cf. iv 29 = LS 64K; v 71;
90). (5) Virtue with preferred indifferents is preferable to virtue alone
- succesfull action = perfectly appropriate action. This may seemcontradictionaey. But Stoics has an answer: Since virtuous people act successfully, they always make appropriate and reasonable attempts to secure preferred indifferents. We can never face a choice, therefore, between a fully virtuous action (i.e., an action done virtuously, as the virtuous person does it) and an action that tries to secure the appro-priate preferred indifferents; for the virtuous course of action necessarily tries to secure appropriate preferred indifferents.
- Properly understood, this account implies that virtuous people are rationally concerned to achieve preferred indifferents, not that they take them to be unimportant.
- Since she is not being praised for the trivially easy action, but for the assent that extends to all appropriate occasions, she is to be praised no less for the right assent when she does trivially easy actions than when the appropriate action is more diff i cult.
- This difference between the assent and the preferable results explains what the Stoics mean in claiming that all successes and all errors are equal (DL vii 120).⁷⁹ he virtuous person assents to the appropriate, rationally defensible action, because it is rationally defensible.
- If one is virtuous, it is preferable to exercise virtue in actions that promote the objective of living in accord with nature; and if one is vicious, it is preferable if one’s vicious actions do not seriously impede this objective. Hence we have good reason to encourage some virtuous actions more vigorously than others; but that does not make them more praiseworthy.
- Alexander is right to claim that since virtue is the craft of selecting correctly among externals, external goods and evils provide its material. But the Stoics argue that virtue is not the craft of selecting among a reasonably plentiful supply of external goods; it is the craft of selecting among any external goods and evils that may be present. Since we can rely on the presence of some external goods and evils while we are alive, there is no reason to suppose that the virtuous person will go short of material. The end that virtuous people aim at is acting reasonably in the pursuit of preferred indifferents. They achieve this aim even in less preferable conditions. They certainly prefer to exercise virtue in favourable conditions, but that makes no difference to whether they achieve their end. Alexander overlooks the grounds for the Stoic division between the end and the objective of virtuous action.
- Virtue itself is the standard by which other things have to be weighed, because it is essential to the self for whom different things must be good, and is not one of the goods to be weighed. Its status in happiness cannot be the status of a mere component.
- Their doctrine seeks to mark a clear division between the end that I ought to have in mind as a guide to my deliberation, and the objective that I ought to have in mind in forming my end, but not as a guide to deliberation
- The virtues are states of character formed by ref l exion on suitable objectives, but the virtuous person is not moved primarily by direct ref l exion on the objectives of virtuous actions
- that the sage has no passions, but is ‘unaffected’ or ‘passionless’ (apathˆ es). The Stoics defend this doctrine in opposition to the Peripatetic doctrine of ‘moderate affection’ (metriopatheia), arguing that the Peripatetic position rests on a confused analysis of passions.
Since a passion is an immediate assent to an indifferent as good or evil, the sage who knows that no indifferent is good or evil, gets rid of passions and does not merely control or temper them
- The Stoics apply the names of some apparent passions to the sage who is free from passion. They deny him pleasure, fear, and appetite, but allow him joy, caution, and wish. Joy is opposed to pleasure, being reasonable elation. Caution is opposed to fear, being reasonable avoidance; for the sage will not fear at all, but will be cautious. And wish is opposed to appetite, being reasonable desire. . . . And they say that the sage is also unaffected, because he is not carried away. But another sort of unaffected person is the bad person, where ‘‘unaffected’’ is equivalent to ‘‘insensitive’’ and ‘‘relentless’’. The sage is self-suff i cient, not in the sense that he wants (vult) to be without a friend, but in the sense that he can do without him. And when I say ‘‘can’’, I mean that he bears it with his mind undisturbed
- They do not suggest that appearances are totally plastic,¹⁰⁰ or that we can expect them to conform completely to correct assents. Though we eliminate passions, because we can eliminate the weak and rash assents, we do not eliminate the appearances that make the suggestions that we tend to assent to.
- The element of a passion that may persist in someone who has eliminated the mistaken assent is the suggestive appearance that encourages the assent.
- Though sages may be moved to tears by an affecting scene in a play, they do not believe that impoverishment and bereavement, however affecting, are bad.
- we do not claim that no preferred indifferent matters at all. We are right to have the appearance of having lost something highly preferable if a child or a friend dies, and we are right to have a more strongly suggestive and disturbing appearance in this case than if we had lost a cup. Sages have appearances that make them vividly aware of preferred and non-preferred indifferents. But this aspect of passions is separable from mistaken assent to the appearance suggesting that something good or evil is involved; that is why sages have no passions, even though they have suggestive appearances.
- Virtuous people should not retain other people’s irrational and excessive reactions to external successes and failures. Their reactions should be proportionate to the value of the situations they react to, and these reactions should never threaten our recognition of the supreme value of virtue. These are the proportionate reactions that the Stoics try to describe more clearly; though sages have no passions, they might claim to react in the ways that Aristotle recommends.
- Appearancea may start reactions in us even without the assent (crying, for example), bur it is ok. But this is not the emotions, because emotions requires assent
- Perhaps our best method for detecting preferred and non-preferred indifferents essentially involves selective and critical reliance on suggestive appearances. It would be a mistake to suppress the suggestion that it is bad to be tortured or impoverished, if this is the best way to turn our attention to these non-preferred indifferents.
- they claim that all human beings form a community that gives them obligations to one another.
- The Stoic sources do not suggest that the virtuous person recognizes just the same obligations to everyone.
- Our duties (off i cia) to human beings in general do not involve self-sacrif i ce; they involve benef i ts to others without harm to ourselves. Cicero illustrates these benef i ts by the example of one person lighting another person’s lamp without losing any of his own light
- But of all the bonds of fellowship, there is none nobler, none more powerful than when good men of congenial character are joined in intimate friendship
- Zeno’s judgment may be in danger of being distorted because he is forming his views in Athens, or among the people he knows best, or because he is thinking about his particular situation as a slave or a slave-owner. To f i nd the point of view of a sage, he needs to separate himself from the distorting inf l uences of these specif i c features of his own situation. He might do this if he takes the point of view of a sage like Confucius, who lacks the appearances that encourage Zeno to draw one conclusion rather than another.
But Confucius’ point of view is a source of good advice for Zeno only if Zeno thinks of Confucius without the particular biases of Confucius’ environment.
- According to the Aristotelian and Stoic conception, 'boulesis' is essentially rational desire, focussed on the final good.
- The Stoics disagree with Aristotle about whether passions are not aimedat the good, in so far as they deny the existence of any desires in rational agents that are not focussed on overall good; the passions are misguided rational desires.
- They agree with Socrates that the source of bad actions is a rational miscalculations of goods
- We are not free to reject the apparently greater good (Intellectualism)
- Passions (or pre-passions) makes it that we think that particular action is good on the whole
- Aristotle, the Stoics, the Scholastics, and Grotius: According to these defenders of natural sociality, facts about human nature itself, and not simply about competition, aggression, and self-preservation (as in Hobbes), make political life appropriate for human beings.
- both Aristotelians and Stoics regard human nature as a source of moral reasons that do not depend on desires. 
- If we do not believe that superior principles guide action, we have no reason to suppose that they guide belief; we must abandon the formation of beliefs on the basis of better reasons. In that case, we have to explain, as the Greek Sceptics try to explain, how we can live simply on the basis of appearances. The Stoics argue that the Sceptical position leads to ‘inaction’ (apraxia).⁹ The sources do not always make it clear what the Stoics think the Sceptic is incapable of. But the most plausible Stoic argument points out that though the Sceptic is capable of goal-directed movement, as a non-rational animal is, Scepticism removes the possibility of acting on reasons. That is why Scepticism makes a human life impossible, so that Sceptics are mistaken in claiming to follow everyday life. The Stoics are urging the absurdity, as Butler puts it, of equal approval and disapproval of any two actions. One passage in Sextus considers this Stoic use of Butler’s argument about absurdity. The dogmatists argue that if a tyrant threatens the Sceptic with a choice between doing something evil and being killed, then either the Sceptic will refuse to do the evil action or he will do as he is told to avoid torture. In either case he will show that he thinks one course of action better than another, and will assent on the basis of that conviction (Sextus, M xi 164).¹⁰ Sextus answers that the Sceptic does not make up his mind by considering the goodness or badness of what he does; he simply follows the appearance that strikes him more strongly. The Stoics need not deny that this sort of response is logically possible. They might reasonably urge that it is nonetheless ‘absurd’, as Butler puts it, because it deprives the Sceptic of the resources that everyone uses to decide such cases. The Sceptic will have to go in one direction or the other without the benefit of the evaluative comparison that we normally rely on. If it is part of a human life to be capable of acting on evaluative comparisons that may alter the strength of our desires, the Sceptic deprives us of a human life. This dispute between Stoics and Sceptics supports Butler’s claim that we cannot abandon the distinction between power and authority in our choices. 








# Difficulties

- When we discover practical reason, we discover that they are not the only goods, and that practical reason is an overriding good. But we seem to have no good reason to abandon our previous belief that the natural advantages are also goods. If our belief in the goodness of some natural advantages is a f i rm preconception, the Stoics violate their own method.