# Definition

Scanlon’s “Contractualism and Utilitarianism” introduces the idea that  rightness and wrongness depend on what could be agreed upon by people  who were motivated to regulate their behavior in ways that similarly motivated others could not reasonably reject.

An action  is wrong if no reasonably unrejectable system of rules would allow it. An  action is permissible if some such systems would allow it. And it is required if no such system or rules would permit refraining from it.

Suppose some people are in fact motivated to  cooperate with others on terms they could not reasonably object to. Having  such motivation would make a difference to what such people could reasonably accept or reject as the terms of cooperation. If there is only one option  that you could not reasonably reject, and I want to cooperate with you on  terms you can’t reasonably reject, then I had better not reject that one option.  To reject it would be to give up on cooperating with you in that way. So  it would be unreasonable to reject that option (given my goal) unless I had  really strong reasons of some other sort to reject that option. If you are  similarly motivated, wanting to cooperate with me in the same spirit, your  reasonable rejection will also be effected by your having cooperation as a  goal. Suppose there are two sets of rules or terms of cooperation that leave  me tolerably well off, but only one of those leaves you tolerably well off.  And suppose also that there are two sets leaving you tolerably well off, but  only one of those (the one already mentioned) that also leaves me tolerably  well off as well. In that case we each have reason not to reject the single  option that leaves both of us tolerably well off. That’s the only one neither  of us can reasonably reject. So our motivations to cooperate on terms that  aren’t reasonably rejectable, together with the reasons we might have to reject  various terms of cooperation, make it the case that only certain terms of  288 Odds, Ends, and Morals cooperation are acceptable. And the rightness and wrongness of certain  actions can then be decided with reference to whether they are allowed by  those terms. 

So we can see Scanlon’s restricted constructivism as generating a form of nonnaturalist realism about morality. 