- CulverwellisnotanextremevoluntaristholdingthepositionofSeldenor(insomerespects) Hobbes. He takes himself to agree with Suarez about the natural goodness and badness, or ‘convenience’ and ‘disconvenience’ of things. This aspect of morality is independent of God’s legislative will.²³



#                  Dificulties

- But, as Suarez and Sanderson argue, a divine command is necessary for genuine moral obligation; the ‘height and perfection of a law’ depends on a divine command. Culverwell claims that, according to Suarez, natural goodness, without divine commands, imposes a ‘natural obligation’, but not a moral obligation, to pursue it.²⁴ Morality and moral obligation depend on a law, and hence a divine command.²⁵ This account misunderstands Suarez on natural and moral obligation.²⁶ Suarez says that natural law presupposes a natural duty (debitum), to which it adds a natural obligation. By this he means that it is natural as opposed to civil, but not that it is natural as opposed to moral.
- The error in Culverwell’s summary of Suarez may be expressed in two ways. (1) If he intends to follow Suarez’s use of ‘obligation’, he is wrong to suppose that Suarez recognizes any obligation independent of the will of an imposer who imposes the obligation by a command. (2) If he uses ‘obligation’ in a broader sense, matching Suarez’s use of ‘duty’, he is wrong to suppose that Suarez recognizes no moral obligation in nature. Perhaps the second description of Culverwell’s error is more accurate.
- Culverwell’s misunderstanding of Suarez reflects his own views about the necessary conditions for morality. He accepts Suarez’s alleged view that non-moral natural obligations are independent of law, but he believes (again supposing that he follows Suarez) that morality requires law, because morality requires moral obligation, and reason cannot bind (oblige) us without reference to the will of God. In acknowledging my action as morally wrong, I acknowledge that it is liable to punishment. If I did not take its wrongness to imply the transgression of a divine command, I would not, according to Culverwell, take it to be liable to the sort of punishment that I ought to accept as justified.²⁸ 