1. Let me introduce peace from my monography. 
2. The title is 'Making Moral Judgements'. 
3. The author Donelson R Forsyth
4. It was written in 2020 and published by the Routledge.
5. This work is relevant in a 2 main aspects: it tries to construct psychological investigation based on philosophical theory and connect it with practice. Forsynth not only sums up up-to-date approaches of studying peoples' moral positions, but develops his own, called 'Ethic position theory', together with 'Ethic Potition Questionnaire'.
6. Purpose (part) - the purpose of this part of the work is to show the history of the approaches of measuring moral positions.
7. Subject of the material - the subject of this work is 'the history of a measuring of moral positions'
8. Main idea - the main idea of this part is to show that his Moral Position Theory is consistent with previous measuring instrumentary. Forsyth claims that he has found correlations of his theory with the main modern meausuring tests.
9. To support his claim he gives next arguments:
	- Using confirmatory factor analysis he finds relatinos between the 5 factors of the Moral Position Questionaire and the 2 factors of the Ethics Position Questionaire.
    - He has find strong correlations between his questionaire and Shwartz's Value Survey
    - He has find correlation between his survey and Ehics of Caring Scale Items
10. Conclusion (importance, how useful) - To draw a conclusion, I would like to say that this book not only important for the psychology as a whole, but also for me personally. I've found that the idea of using philosophical enquieries in psychological studies may be productive and empirically adequate.