# Definition

Nonnaturalists are minimal realists, although they are more than minimal  realists. They think that (1) there are properties or relations corresponding to moral predicates, that (2) moral sentences predicate these properties, and  that (3) moral thoughts represent actions, people, or things as having these  properties. They think that (4) some of these sentences and thoughts predicating moral properties are true and that (5) we believe the propositions  they represent when we accept them.

What differs Nonnatural properties from natural ones? - normativity. Nonnaturalists think that genuine normativity has a certain sort of authority. We can illustrate with Philippa Foot’s  (1972) example; sexist club rules that ban women from the smoking room  are normative in the sense that they specify norms of behavior. But they  don’t give us any reason to follow them just because they have that form.  In fact we have reason to flout them. They’re not authorative in the sense  that norms prescribing kindness or honesty might be. When nonnaturalists  talk about normativity, they take normativity to have the kind of authority  that the sexist club rules obviously lack. 

# Assumptions

The natural properties form a natural or unified kind -  Natural properties, relations, and kinds, as nonnaturalists (and many naturalists) think of them, share enough similarities with one another to count  as a higher order kind (a kind of kinds). To say that a property is nonnatural,  then, is to say that it does not belong to that higher order kind. Whatever  it is that unifies this kind, even if it is only a certain sort of family resemblance, nonnatural properties lack that unifying trait. 

Nonnaturalists also  deny supernaturalism, though they usually only make that commitment  clear in passing. Either, (like thoroughgoing naturalists) they think there are  no supernatural kinds, entities, relations, properties—thus they don’t need  to say anything further to divide the supernatural from the nonnatural. Or,  they think the supernatural is a higher order kind of properties, relations,  and kinds on a par with the natural. In that case their claim is just that the  normative should not be classified as falling in either one of those two higher  order kinds. 