# Definition

There is no 

# Assumptions

- Brink, for example, asserts that the central existence [[Internalism]] claim—that  moral facts must motivate—is a priori precisely because it is conceptually  secured (Brink, 1989, pp. 39–43). The underlying picture being attributed  to the existence internalist is Fregean, and that is probably fair to most such  theorists. 
  **Concepts** = **senses that must be grasped by competent speakers**  of a language. These **senses determine** the **referent** of the speaker’s terms **in** a **satisfactional manner**. **If something doesn’t satisfy** the **condition it cannot  be** the **referent** of the term. The term ‘**morally wrong**’ **picks out** the **property  wrongness because this property satisfies** the **condition** specified—the condition that **it motivate agents to avoid wrongness**. **Properties that don’t meet  that condition would not be candidates for the referent of ‘moral wrongness.’**  **If this is what internalism requires, any anti-Fregean account of reference (for example [[Direct Reference Theory]])  will be incompatible with morals/motives** or **morals/reasons existence internalism**. **Suppose, as direct reference theories do, that moral predicates are  just tags for moral properties**. These **tags directly contribute** the **property**  itself (however described) **to** the **content of the sentence** of which it is a  part. The **picking out is direct** insofar as **it is unmediated by any descriptive  sense**. In that case, **there** just **won’t be** any **conceptual truths of the required  sort that speakers know** just **in virtue of knowing** the **meanings of** their **terms**. **There** just **won’t be anything built into the meanings of** the relevant  **expressions that requires the referents to be capable of motivating**. **There merely needs to be a causal chain leading from the referent of the expression  to a speaker’s** meaningful **use of that expression**. The **speaker need know  little about** what is at the **other end of that chain** in order for her term to  refer. She just has to be so connected. If that is how reference works **there  can’t be** a conceptually **guaranteed requirement that true moral claims be  motivationally efficacious**.