- Ignorance and inattention normally regarded as culpable actually result from one’s appearance of the good; since we cannot control this appearance, we cannot be held responsible for the results of acting on it
- Non-sceptics cannot achieve complete freedom from the disturbance that results from passions, because some of this disturbance is inevitable and independent of belief; but since he achieves freedom from the dogmatists’ disturbance and adds no new disturbance of his own, his passions are less disturbing than the dogmatist’s passions (P i 29–30). He thereby achieves ‘the most complete (teleiotatˆ en) happiness’
- The Sceptics agree with their dogmatic opponents that belief (doxa) is to be understood as a normative state; we form a belief by an attempted assessment of the evidence, and if we change our view about the evidence, we change our belief. Sceptics agree that dogmatists have beliefs, since their view of the world rests on an attempted rational assessment of the evidence. The dogmatists are wrong, however, to suppose that they rationally assess the evidence. Since Sceptics see the dogmatists’ error, they give up forming beliefs. Their yielding to appearances is not belief, because it does not rest on an assessment of evidence, and therefore it is non-normative. The meat in the display case looks bright red, but if we are dogmatists we may not infer that it is red, if we remember that a red light is shining on it. The evidence that would otherwise persuade us to believe that the meat is red is open to question once we remember the red light shining on the meat, and so we will not hastily infer that the meat is fresh. Next, we do not take the further step of considering whether it is really how it looks.
- Aristotelian deliberation involves a rational estimate of grounds for preferring one or another option, and our election is guided by this rational estimate. Sceptics accept this description of deliberation, and therefore give up deliberation, because they make no rational estimates. 









#                  Difficulties

- If we do not believe that superior principles guide action, we have no reason to suppose that they guide belief; we must abandon the formation of beliefs on the basis of better reasons. In that case, we have to explain, as the Greek Sceptics try to explain, how we can live simply on the basis of appearances. The Stoics argue that the Sceptical position leads to ‘inaction’ (apraxia).⁹ The sources do not always make it clear what the Stoics think the Sceptic is incapable of. But the most plausible Stoic argument points out that though the Sceptic is capable of goal-directed movement, as a non-rational animal is, Scepticism removes the possibility of acting on reasons. That is why Scepticism makes a human life impossible, so that Sceptics are mistaken in claiming to follow everyday life. The Stoics are urging the absurdity, as Butler puts it, of equal approval and disapproval of any two actions. One passage in Sextus considers this Stoic use of Butler’s argument about absurdity. The dogmatists argue that if a tyrant threatens the Sceptic with a choice between doing something evil and being killed, then either the Sceptic will refuse to do the evil action or he will do as he is told to avoid torture. In either case he will show that he thinks one course of action better than another, and will assent on the basis of that conviction (Sextus, M xi 164).¹⁰ Sextus answers that the Sceptic does not make up his mind by considering the goodness or badness of what he does; he simply follows the appearance that strikes him more strongly. The Stoics need not deny that this sort of response is logically possible. They might reasonably urge that it is nonetheless ‘absurd’, as Butler puts it, because it deprives the Sceptic of the resources that everyone uses to decide such cases. The Sceptic will have to go in one direction or the other without the benefit of the evaluative comparison that we normally rely on. If it is part of a human life to be capable of acting on evaluative comparisons that may alter the strength of our desires, the Sceptic deprives us of a human life. This dispute between Stoics and Sceptics supports Butler’s claim that we cannot abandon the distinction between power and authority in our choices. 