- Mistakely thinks that Aristotle thought that only virtue of character is a real virtue
- Reciprocity of the virtues - each virtue requires each of the others
- The Naturalism is true. Human functionis to be guided by practical reason
- Aquinas marks three aspects of natural law, corresponding to three elements of human nature
- concept of consent
- He is close to Stoics inhis position about a Responsibility
- Christian morality is not only consistent with moral philosophy, as understood by the Greek philosophers, but actually brings out the best in it. He argues that we can see, from the point of view of Greek moral philosophy itself, the moral excellence of the Christian moral outlook, so that this is actually a point in favour of Christianity
- Aquinas explains Paul through his Aristotelian moral psychology.
- Aquinas’ interpretation of Aristotle influenced by Augustine’s version of Stoicism
- Describes the Christian virtues within an explicitly Aristotelian framework
- The passions are the subject of the moral virtues
- Argues against the ‘Augustinian’ position, arguing that Augustine does not hold that greeks did not have virtues at all. Aquinas also say that Christian moral philosophy and theology do not require it.⁹⁰
- Freewill = choice
- Will = rational desire
- The moral philosopher studies sin as a violation of reason, whereas the theologian studies it as a violation of the divine law.
- Freedom, moral and responsibility reduce to facts about rational agency
- Virtues require the perfection of the passions as well as the will.
- We always pursue happiness
- defends a reduction of the voluntary and of freewill to the exercise of will in rational choice
- Human beings also seem to act on passions, not always on deliberated will; and when we act on passions, we act for the sake of an end. But Aquinas seems to exclude these from properly human actions; his treatment of the nature of human action distinguishes properly human actions from the actions common to human and other animals, which are actions on passion. He does not really intend, however, to exclude actions on passion from properly human actions. Properly human actions are voluntary, since they proceed from the will (voluntas); but actions on passion are voluntary if they are appropriately related to the will (1-2 q6 a6–7; q10 a3). Hence actions on passion are included, through their relation to the will, among the properly human actions, and therefore among those that are directed towards an ultimate end.
- Aquinas marks this contrast between rational and non-rational agency by distinguishing determination to a particular good from determination to a universal good. Since the object of the will is the universal good, creatures that lack reason cannot have a will because they cannot grasp a universal good, but are determined to some particular good (1-2 q1 a2 ad3).³⁵ This is why they lack election. Rational agent have a will, that turns them towards universal good, whereas non-rational desires turns only towards particular objects. Non-rational agents make judgements, but only about 1 partucalar thing - hence, their actions also goal-directed, but not rational and free.
- I direct my own action, instead of simply being moved by features of external objects, in so far as I assess my initial value judgments about external objects in the light of my other value judgments.
- Soul consists from :
    - Will - Rational Desire
    - Passions aka Sensory Desires aka Non-Eational desires:
    - appetites
    - spiritual part
- Some passions has ther intellectual twins:
    - Love
    - Joy
    - others
- Passions are passive, because they pushes a man to behave independently of one's whole nature
- Sensory desire is moved by the estimative capacity (aestimativa virtus), so that when a sheep takes a wolf to be an enemy, it is afraid (1a q78 a4).⁶¹ This capacity requires imagination and memory; for the information it conveys (that the wolf is an enemy) is not immediately available to the senses.⁶² In a human being the estimative capacity is the cognitive capacity, or ‘particular reason’, which in turn is moved by universal reason
- Passions do not simply express one’s will, because will is about universal good and passions are about particular good
- He distinguishes sadness ‘in accordance with a complete passion’ (secundum passionem perfectam) from sadness ‘in accordance with a pre-passion’, and attributes only the latter to Christ. By ‘complete passion’ he seems to mean the sort of passion that is capable of carrying away reason by securing consent:
‘sometimes in us <ordinary human beings> movements of this sort do not stop in sensory desire, but draw reason <with them>’. Christ did not have this sort of passion. In using ‘pre-passion’, Aquinas gives the misleading impression that he agrees with the Stoics in regarding such a state as only a precursor of a genuine passion; but his explanation counteracts this impression.
- He agrees with Augustine that Stoics are wrong that there is no non-rational passions
- Aquinas believes, however, that the passions do not characteristically move us to action by themselves; they require the co-operation of will, which essentially pursues the f i nal good.
- Intellectual desire, though it tends towards individual things outside the soul, tends towards them in accordance with some universal character (ratio), as when it desires something because it is good’
- Rational agents have wills, essentially rational desires, in so far as they desire something because it is good, and hence desire in accord with some universal character.⁷⁰ They pursue particular goods not simply because they are attracted to a specif i c sort of object, but also because they take the object to have some valued property that gives a reason for pursuing it.⁷¹ Aquinas captures this aspect of a rational desire in ‘because it is good’; in acting on rational desire we assume that an object is good. This desire is rational because it proceeds by free judgment, not natural judgment, and by rational comparison, not natural instinct.⁷² Comparison is connected with free judgment, because free agents are capable of choosing different things in a particular situation, and so they need some means of comparing the different possibilities.
- The wills (rational desires) and passiins (non-deliberative desires) are different kinds of desire because a deliberative desire is liable to change in circumstances that would not necessarily affect a non-deliberative desire
- The common good that guides deliberation is a f i nal good that provides a basis for selecting what seems best overall (all things considered) - so, ultimate good is possible, because it is possible to find best way to act all things considered
- Even if we do not think about the ultimate end (q1 a6 obj3), we may act for its sake. Travellers on a journey from London to Glasgow try to go from Preston to Carlisle because of their decision to go to Glasgow. They may only be thinking now about how to get from Preston to Carlisle, not about how to get to Glasgow; but they would not be thinking now about getting to Carlisle if they had not decided to go to Glasgow. Their aim is directed ultimately towards the ultimate end, but immediately towards some more proximate end.⁷⁵
- Ultimate end = happiness
- Our pursuit of an ultimate end is necessary for freedom, not a restriction on freedom.
- He derived his account of freedom from his account of an action
- But since actions on passion also seem to be properly human acts, in contrast to the thoughtless scratching of one’s beard, we may wonder how they are related to Aquinas’ account of properly human acts.
- If we necessarily willed the ultimate end as having some highly determinate content specifying a particular action, we would not be rational agents, since we would not act on rational comparison of different possible objects of pursuit.
- This deliberation begins from our aiming at (intendere) an end, not simply from wishing it. To wish for an end is only to recognize that we would prefer getting something over failing to get it, or that we would be pleased if we could get it; this sort of wish is simply a ‘velleity’.⁵ We might have several such preferences, but to begin deliberation we must set out to satisfy one rather than another of them. We direct ourselves towards getting an end;
‘for we are said to aim at health not simply because we will it, but because we will to reach it through something else’ (q12 a1 ad4). ‘Through something else’ refers to means, but not to any particular means; we can aim at an end without having determined the means, which are the concern of election (q12 a4 ad3). By ‘directing’ (ordinare) ourselves towards trying to attain the end (q12 a1 ad1), we differ from non-rational agents: to aim (intendere) is to tend (tendere) towards something; and this belongs to the mover and to the moved. non-rational animals also aim at an end, to the extent that they are moved to something by natural instinct. But in another way aiming at an end belongs to the mover, in so far as he directs the movement of himself or another towards an end. This belongs only to reason. That is why non-rational animals do not aim at an end in this way, which is aiming properly and principally
- Aquinas believes that if we direct our action towards an end, we are also in control of our actions. Rational agents aim at an end in directing themselves actively, not in being directed passively.⁹ I direct my action towards an end in so far as I limit my inclination towards this action by my estimate of the end that it is directed to. To do this, I must also be able to estimate the value of this end;¹⁰ hence I must have some idea of what makes it an end for me and of what is good about it. This is why rational agents must present the end to themselves. Rational agent can see a structure of a means to end: sometimes ends become means, sometime means become ends, both through deliberation.
- From the fact that deliberating reason is related to opposites it results that the will is capable of going in both directions
- Aiming, as opposed to merely wishing, requires us to look for means to our end.
- Mental states leading from will to action:
    1. Aiming at the end
    2. Deliberation - finding means for achieving an end. Deliberation includes questions about what an end consists in.
    3. Consent - Before we can act, we have to engage our capacities to move ourselves; and this ‘engaging’ or ‘application’ of our motive capacities is what Aquinas calls consent. This stages check whether a means is possible
    4. Election - Consent recognizes something as satisfactory; from this preliminary recognition election picks out one of the satisfactory things as better than another. If we recognize only one thing as satisfactory, the same action is both consent and election; in this case they differ only in definition (ratione tantum). If we recognize several things as satisfactory, we elect one over the others. This stage finds one mean as the best all things considered
- Aquinas' election are not Stoics' assent - because election needs alternatives while assent doesn't
- Our will follows our conception of the overall good, which rests on our comparative estimate of various specif i c goods. Passions inf l uence this comparative estimate by bringing particular goods to our attention and presenting them in a favourable light that alters our estimate of how good they are.
- The will can influence passions by:
    - Force:
        - Restraining
        - Arousing new passions
    - Permission to act on the passions
- He argues against Stoics' view that passions give us false appearance of a universal goodnes of an action: he thinks that passions give us appearances only of a particular goods: a passion inclines us to value judgments that we would not otherwise have formed (1-2 q9 a2). Under its inf l uence we form particular value judgments (‘it would be good to retaliate for this insult’) whose generalizations (‘it is good to retaliate for insults’) we would not accept if we considered them (q9 a2 ad2). When we are inf l uenced by passions, we do not judge on the basis that we would normally endorse. A passion makes some particular course of action appear more attractive than it would appear otherwise.
- If the will permits and regulates, we can act on passions without deliberation.³⁷ If the action was wrong, the will made an error by omission; the error depends on a cause or occasion of omission that is subject to the will.³⁸ What I do now without an election on this occasion results from previous election, if I have elected to allow myself to be affected by certain sorts of desires, or if I have declined the opportunity to avoid them. Hence my will, through my conception of my ultimate end, inf l uences actions that conf l ict with my conception of the ultimate end. My failure to recognize all the implications of my conception of the ultimate end makes it intelligible that I allow actions that, if I thought about them more carefully, I would not allow. Aquinas’ views on regulation and permission also suggest that we act on passion if we simply consent to the passion by non-intervention. Non-intervention need not result from a deliberate choice not to intervene; we may simply be too hasty or too lazy to think about whether we ought to intervene. Such haste or laziness partly depends on our will, just as the later stages of a journey are dependent on the elections that we made at earlier stages;
for our previous deliberation and choice affect our later tendency to stop and think or to proceed without thinking.
- Will is an essentially rational desire aiming at a universal good.
- Aquinas rejects the extreme intellectualist view that reason is the primary cause of rational action, so that will is simply an intermediary cause that is ultimately explained by reference to reason. He also rejects the extreme voluntarist view that will is the primary cause of rational action and reason is only a secondary cause, so that the role of reason is subordinate to the role of will. Against these two extreme views Aquinas argues that action proceeds primarily from the will, but the will is rational desire, and is therefore essentially guided by our intellectual conception of the greatest good. A voluntarist rejects this account of action, but still agrees with Aquinas in accepting rationalism about the relation of will to passion.
We will eventually need to ask whether this combination of voluntarism and rationalism is coherent or plausible; but if we do not recognize the difference between intellectualism and rationalism, we cannot even see the questions that need to be asked.
- Aquinas agrees with Aristotle’s claim that thought by itself moves nothing, and that in order to initiate motion it must be ‘thought for the sake of some end’ (EN 1139a35–6). Aristotle believes that this goal-directed thought initiating action requires the presence of desire. Similarly, Aquinas asserts that our cognitive capacity does not move us without desire as intermediary.
- Aquinas does not suggest that deliberation simply causes our desire to pass from the end through the prediction that this action will promote the end.⁵⁰ We recognize that the action deserves to be done, and our recognition moves our will. In this respect, intellect commands acts of the will. But intellect does not command all acts of the will, since it presupposes an act of will.
We would not deliberate, and hence we would not reach a conclusion that could be the content of a command, unless we had wills that aimed at the good. The simple recognition that something deserves to be done would make no systematic difference to our action unless we had wills—forms of desire that respond to what deserves to be done. If we could recognize what is worth doing, but we had no wills, our recognition that it is worthwhile to learn to play the violin would not affect us in itself; it would affect us only if we already had some non-rational preference for playing the violin or for some end to which it seems to be a means. Hence intellect moves the will as f i nal cause, whereas the will moves the intellect as eff i cient cause (1a q82 a4). The ‘active’ function of the will is prominent in interpretations that minimize the extent of Aquinas’ intellectualism.⁵¹ He points out that our deliberation is inf l uenced not only by the end that we want to achieve, but also by whether we choose to deliberate, how much we choose to deliberate, and what we choose to consider in our deliberation.⁵² Since these choices depend on the will, some operations of intellect depend on will. Though the exercise of will in election depends on intellect, the will does not depend wholly on intellect. It also depends on the initial contribution of will in controlling the focus and the character of our deliberation.
- He does not hold a voluntarist conception of this role of will; for he does not claim that in this role the will is free to choose independently of the apparent good.
- The will moves the intellect as eff i cient cause whereas the intellect moves the will as formal and f i nal cause.⁵⁷ The intellect has a causal role because it presents to the will the end that explains the will’s willing a particular action (bodily or mental) for the sake of the end;
and in presenting this end it also gives the will the relevant form (being the will to achieve this end). These different causal roles express the fact that our will moves us in a particular direction only because it aims at a particular end as good, and depends on the intellect to present it to us as good.
- Aquinas’ position, therefore, is moderate rather than extreme intellectualism, but it is a form of intellectualism rather than a combination of intellectualism and voluntarism. It avoids the extreme intellectualist claim that intellect independent of will determines will and action, but it also avoids the voluntarist claim that will independent of intellect determines intellect and action. We necessarily desire what we apprehend as promoting the ultimate good; if we fail to choose something that at f i rst seemed to promote the ultimate good, we have changed our mind about whether it really promotes the ultimate good.⁵⁸ We act rationally in so far as intellect constrains the operation of the will. In Aquinas’ view, we cannot f i rmly believe that x rather than y promotes the good, and then—while still clearly understanding and f i rmly believing this—will y rather than x. This intellectual constraint on the will applies no less to the acts of will that inf l uence deliberation than to those that result from deliberation.
- There are both External and Internal reasons
- insisting on a basic desire for the ultimate good, Aquinas implies that we can grasp external reasons only in relation to each other and to their common end. He is therefore a rationalist about will and passion, since he does not believe that the rational merits of a given action are determined by an antecedent desire with some determinate content. He believes that our desires are directed towards action on the recognition of the rational merits of a course of action.
- Aquinas believes that his conception of the will and the passions and of their relations allows us to understand the distinction (i) between voluntary and involuntary actions, and (ii) between free and unfree actions.
- Aquinas cannot reasonably deny that actions on non-rational desires are voluntary; for he agrees with Aristotle that they are open to praise and blame.
- A morally bad action results when the will breaks out towards action (in actionem prorumpit) either (i) on an apprehension belonging to sense, or (ii) on an apprehension of reason presenting some good different from one’s proper good (10 §1949).
- Since Aquinas presents his account of the voluntary as an account of the basis of justif i ed praise and blame, he believes that if we are voluntary agents, we also have freewill.
- My freedom in making the choice depends on whether I freely make the judgment underlying the choice (1a q83 a2 obj1). If freewill is a potentiality, it must be identif i ed with the potentiality that ensures freedom in our judgments
- To show that freewill is the same as will, Aquinas considers reasons for believing they are different.
- Aquinas claims to have found a place for free choice within his account of the will, through his description of election as the outcome of will and deliberation. Therefore he identif i es the exercise of freewill with election, which he takes to be an exercise of will. Electing is different from merely willing, but it does not require any further capacity beyond willing and deliberating (2Sent d24 q1 a3 sol. = P 595b). Willing and electing are different states of the same capacity
- Though we necessarily will the indeterminate ultimate end, it is still left to us to deliberate about what we think it consists in, and therefore we are not necessitated to choose the particular action that we eventually elect.
- Aquinas confronts a related question about uncertainty in his discussion of deliberation and election. He argues that uncertainty, inquiry, and deliberation are not necessary for election. Since he allows election without uncertainty, and since he takes election to imply freewill, he also allows freewill without uncertainty.
- He therefore claims that God and the angels have freedom, even though they do not need to inquire and they do not face uncertainty. God does not will necessarily everything that he wills. God wills his goodness necessarily, and he wills some other things because of his good-ness, but these things are not necessary for his goodness, and he does not will them necessar-ily.⁴⁵This is why God has freewill.⁴⁶Angels do not choose what they do through deliberation, since their mode of knowledge does not need inquiry; and so their freedom does not rest on deliberation (1a q59 a3 ad1). In these cases where there is no uncertainty and no inquiry, Aquinasarguesthatnonetheless‘whereverthereisintellect,thereisfreewill’.⁴⁷ Freedomrests on the fact that our choice of one good over another is determined by our judgment about its greater goodness; in human agents this judgment about goodness results from deliberation. 
their choice is not limited by inability to consider any alternatives that ought to be considered. They choose the action they choose as a result of thought that appropriately weighs any different options that they need to weigh;
the fact that no weighing is necessary does not make it any less true that their thought is capable of weighing. Since no inability to weigh causes them to act as they do without deliberation, they act freely.
- He intends his analysis of rational agency to explain his account of freedom. His view is not that we have freewill despite our lacking freedom in relation to the ultimate end. On the contrary, we have freewill precisely because we are not free not to pursue an ultimate
- Free choice requires election because non-rational desire is ‘determined to one object’, whereas rational desire is not. Hence creatures with only non-rational desire lack election. They are free in relation to external circumstances, but not in relation to their desires, since the relative strength of their desires determines their action. Rational agents are free in relation to their desires, since they can alter the relative strength of their desires.
- If we did not pursue a f i nal good, we would have no basis for evaluating one object of desire in comparison to another; when we compare one object of desire in the light of what matters most to us, we rely on our conception of our f i nal good, as Aquinas understands it. We act rationally in so far as we regulate our actions and choices by some deliberate and ref l ective view of their connexion with the ultimate end; this feature of rational action distinguishes it from the action of non-rational animals, who lack the conception of an ultimate end and so cannot regulate their actions by it. 
- If, however, we are free in the choice of ends, we must recognize external reasons; we must be able to appeal to some reason, apart from the strength of our desire, for pursuing one end over another. We are free in relation to ends because we can choose them in accordance with standards of goodness that are external to our desiring and valuing. 
- Aquinas rejects Socratic intellectualism, and hence rejects the reduction of vice to ignorance.
- But Aquinas’ conditions for freewill could be satisf i ed even if all our choices and actions were causally necessitated. Its choice of non-ultimate goods is ‘not determined’, in the respect that it is not determined independently of our reasoning; it rests on the consideration of alternatives.
- He believes that the will of rational agents is immaterial, and so cannot be determined by external physical causes (1-2 q9 a5); but his immaterialism is not necessary for his defence of freewill.
- Our dissatisfaction presupposes that all our ends ought to be co-ordinated, and that none ought to be insulated from comparison with others; hence we already value the co-ordination of all our ends, and we pursue a single co-ordinated system. This is the system that Aquinas describes as a single ultimate end. Aquinas’ claim that the will necessarily takes the ultimate end as its object is not simply a statement of psychological necessity; it is not comparable, for instance, to the claim that we tend to prefer the interests of people we know well, or tend to prefer what will happen in a month over what will happen in ten years. Nor, on the other hand, is it logically necessary that every conceivable agent with desires, or even every conceivable agent capable of deliberation about the satisfaction of its desires, pursues an ultimate end.
Aquinas’ description of an ultimate end offers a partial def i nition of a will. If we could show that an agent’s desires were not arranged and modif i ed in the light of some conception of an ultimate end, we would thereby have shown that the agent is not rational and has no will. Aquinas’ claim that human beings have wills, therefore, does not follow from the mere fact that we have desires, or even from the fact that we are capable of inf l uencing them in some ways by deliberation. In claiming that we have wills, he claims that our desire and deliberation have the structure that relies on a comprehensive (it is a term) ultimate end.
- Necessary acceptance of Principle of Non-Contradiction aka PNC makes someone a rational subject of belief and knowledge; necessary pursuit of the ultimate good makes someone a rational agent.
- Following Plato and Aristotle, he believes that a distinct type of desire belongs to each part of the tripartite soul.
- The desires of the non-rational parts aim at things that we recognize as actual objects of our desires (or means to achieving these objects). The desire of the rational part is directed to things whose properties merit their being desired, not to things that are already desired.
- Ultimate end is not simply an ordered collection of objects of our basic preferences. We also treat it as including external reasons in support of our basic preferences.
- If this feature of the will implies that we desire goods that are good independently of our desiring them, so that our desiring them does not constitute their goodness, our conception of the ultimate end appeals to a standard of perfection beyond mere comprehensiveness
- He believes that this complete happiness can be achieved only in the afterlife, when we gain all the features of happiness that we cannot achieve in this life. Every good other than the f i nal good itself lacks some good from some point of view; this is why deliberation is needed for us to choose it. Even the goods that we choose as a result of correct deliberation require, in the circumstances of human life, the renunciation of other genuine goods. Hence none of these particular goods can completely satisfy the will. Only the vision of God himself can fully satisfy us (q3 a1, 8). Hence, neither the life of contemplation nor the life of moral virtue, nor the mixed life of contemplation and moral virtue, meets Aristotle’s formal criteria, if we restrict ourselves to this life.
- External goods are needed for happiness
- Aquinas believes tha Aristotle disrtincts 2 kinds of happiness:
    - Imperfect - the ones that we can achieve in these life. It is unstable, but cannot be totally removed as long as we virtuously deal with troubles. This sort of happiness gives us an account of the best actions of the ones we have right now. But they all are not perfect.
    - Perfect - one that can be achieved in the afterlife. It is stable and full. This happiness gives us an account of actions that are the best from every other. We can't do them, because we are weak and this world is imperfect, but these account of happiness is very important, because it gives us the proper aim. Also, it gives us the hope to aim to the perfect life, because we can see that some changes are possible (for example, we can see that there are not so many slavery right now, opposed to the 2000 years back)
- Aquinas agrees with Aristotle that the contemplation of God is the only way of life we must aim to, because virtues actions are good in themselves and comntemplation of God requires the renunciation of other virtues (in afterlife contemplation of God does not requires it, though, because contemplation of God in the afterlife contains all of the virtues). The life for others are better, because it do better for me + for others (where life for me do better only for me). Though for Aquinas the contemplative life is better than the life that consists only in virtuous actions, he says that contemplative life yet not good anough anyway, because life that includes both contamplation and virtues are better.
- Prudence is concernef with the means to the ends
- Practical Reason discovers the right ends
- Passions help or mislead us by focusing us on the particular nuances of a situation
- People who ho brave actions for honour must be praised, though not that much as the ones, that do brave actions whethrr or not they are praised
- Aquinas perhaps means to contrast two judgments: (1) It is best all things considered to do what my passion tells me (and it tells me to do x). (2) Doing x is best all things considered here and now (and my passion tells me to do x). When we sin from passion, we make the f i rst sort of judgment, but not the second. The passion—my desire for revenge, for instance—does not alter my conception of the good so that I really think it better to take revenge even at the cost of all the resulting evils. But revenge is attractive enough to make me think it is all right to listen to my passion on this occasion rather than to follow my conception of the good. If I choose to ignore the content of my conception of the good, my choice ref l ects my views about my ultimate end and about when it is necessary or desirable to act on deliberation about the good. Such choices conf i rm Aquinas’ distinction between actions that we do ‘electing’ and those we do ‘from election’. What the incontinent elects as best is not seducing the wife of one’s neighbour, but following the suggestion of the passion.
He allows himself to be persuaded that it is best to follow his passion here and now, because he attends more to the attractiveness of the object of the passion than to the demands of his conception of the good.
Incontinents are not to be blamed simply for listening to a current passion; for that may sometimes be a sensible thing to do. It is wise to attend to our passions if they help us to identify what matters when we try to deliberate.⁶² They may do this even when they conf l ict with our initial rational judgment; if, for instance, we are vividly aware of the suffering inf l icted by our (as we supposed) just punishment, we may have a good reason to follow our current reaction, and to think again about whether the punishment is really just.
Incontinents are mistaken because they listen to the wrong sort of passion. We attend to our reluctance to inf l ict severe suffering because we assume that such reluctance is generally appropriate; but we would be wrong to attend to our dislike of the person to whom we think we owe an apology. He should be blamed because of his attending to his passions without the examination. 
- In suggesting that the choice of immoral action involves a false conception of the end, Aquinas implies that the right conception of the ultimate end requires recognition of the non-instrumental value of morally virtuous action; that is why the virtuous person and the sinner do not disagree simply about the choice of means to an end. 
- In sins from passion and in sins from deliberate fault, deliberation is prematurely halted and diverted. In sins from passion this is because of the suddenness of the passion. In sins from deliberate fault, deliberation stops too soon because it is warped even when we are not subject to a sudden passion. In both cases, we do not complete deliberation as we should. 
- Aquinas believes that sin from deliberate fault is compatible with the absence of vice.
- Incontinent person sees value of virtues, but also sees that external goods are equally important. Vicious person doesn't value virtues at all. 
- Aquinas says that virtuous man can sin
- He didn't thought that morality needs a ligislator, because the legislation needs reason or it is unjust. 
- He tends to use ‘ought’ (debere) to cover the broad area of moral requirements in general, and to use ‘oblige’ when he is thinking of a duty as imposed by law.
- God does not owe grace or glory to us, except on the assumption that he has ordered things this way; but he owes it to himself to fulf i ll his own ordering
- Aquinas, therefore, agrees that a law binds and obliges. But he does not infer that law involves the will either of the commander or of the commanded. A law consists in its being true that one ought to do x, on the assumption that one wills y. This law moves us only if we will y, but the law exists whether or not the commander or the commanded wills y, and whether or not the commander wills the commanded to pursue y. Law involves practical thought, and hence deliberation aimed at one’s own happiness. It is directed to a common good rather than to one’s individual good, because a common good is a more ‘perfect’ or ‘complete’ good.²⁹ In turning to the end pursued by law, we do not turn away from individual happiness, but we complete it.
- Publication does not require that we actually know the law, but only that it is available for us to know. We would be bound by the law if we were in the right cognitive condition to come to know the law, even if no one had put us in this condition. Aquinas does not suggest that I am obliged to do X only if someone tells me that he wants me to do X, or that I am obliged to do X only if I recognize that someone is telling me that he wants me to do X. His conditions allow publication without a publisher
- The natural law in us, therefore, is our disposition to deliberate with reference to our own ultimate end. He does not take our awareness of the natural law to be a new source of moral insight distinct from our ref l exion on our happiness; nor does he take it to provide distinct grounds for virtuous action, apart from those that have already appeared to practical reason. Aquinas certainly believes in God as a legislator, but he does not take the truth of this belief to be essential to the existence of natural law. Aquinas’ position therefore seems to distinguish—though only implicitly—the facts grasped by rational agents from the rational agents’ grasping of them, and seems to require both of these for the existence of natural law.
- God is omnipotent in so far as God’s rational will is not restrained by anything external.⁴¹ But this does not mean that God is free to change himself. In particular God is not free not to have the sort of will that prefers the good; for if God lacked such a will, God would be less perfect than he is. God does not will of necessity everything that he wills (1a q19 a3); he could have created a better world than the one he chose to create (q25 a6).⁴² Still, God is not free not to choose what seems to him better all things considered. On this point Aquinas is an intellectualist about God’s freedom.⁴³ But God’s will, God’s reason, and the eternal law are not three independent things. Given God’s simplicity and eternity, they are three ways of referring to the same thing. God’s will is not compelled by something external to and independent of it.
Divine freedom, therefore, does not require God’s will to be capable of changing the eternal law. The eternal law expresses God’s free will.
- Though God is not free to violate the natural law or to refrain from commanding its observance, God’s legislative role is not conf i ned to endorsing the provisions of natural law. God also commands actions that are not commanded by natural law, which it would not be wrong to omit if they had not been commanded. Violation of such a command is ‘bad because it is prohibited’ (malum quia prohibitum) rather than ‘prohibited because it is bad’ (prohibitum quia malum), whereas violations of natural law are prohibited because they are bad.
- In calling natural law natural, he makes at least three claims about its status:     - He refers to our way of knowing the law. To know the precepts of positive law, we need specif i c information about a particular community, but to know the precepts of the natural law we need no special education or information. We have the relevant knowledge by nature, without education or training, and no matter how bad our education and training may be.
Our natural knowledge of the natural law is the basis for acquiring knowledge of further practical principles (1-2 q91 a3). Different people are aware of these f i rst principles of practical reason to different extents, and with different degrees of explicitness; but since we all grasp them in some way, we naturally participate in the eternal law (q91 a2).⁴⁷ Our awareness of the f i rst principles of natural law is meant to explain how it is possible for us to guide our action correctly by reason and will. 
    - The natural law is natural not only because of how we know it, but also because of its content. It applies to us in virtue of our nature. The principles of natural law are the correct principles for us to follow as the sorts of creatures we are with the natures we have. In so far as we know the principles of the natural law, we learn something about our nature and about what is suitable for us.⁴⁸ 
    - This law is natural for us in so far as we naturally follow it. We naturally participate in the eternal law not only by knowing what is suitable for our nature, but also by naturally behaving in accordance with it. This is why Aquinas claims that the precepts of the natural law are revealed in our natural inclinations (q91 a2).
It is not logically necessary for one and the same law to have all these features.
- Aquinas believes our world is a bit like these worlds, in so far as our knowledge and our inclination are imperfect. Original sin leaves us with misdirected desires that tend to obscure our knowledge and to pervert our inclinations and actions. This imperfection in our nature means that we cannot simply discover what is naturally suitable for us by an indiscriminate survey of our natural beliefs and inclinations. If we took these as our guides, we would treat the impulses of our misdirected desires as impulses towards what is naturally suitable.
To avoid the distorting effects of misdirected desires, we must rely on our knowledge of human nature and the ultimate human end, and use this to identify the natural beliefs and inclinations that tell us what is suitable for our nature. In the Summa Aquinas discusses sin immediately before law, so that we recognize some of the tendencies of misdirected desires, and do not identify them with the requirements of our nature.
With these qualif i cations and reservations, Aquinas takes the three aspects of the naturalness of the natural law to be connected.
- We will something as good in so far as we choose it for some reason beyond the mere fact that we desire it. We choose for reasons independent of desire in so far as we assess particular goods with reference to one another in our conception of the ultimate good.⁵⁰ In claiming that his principle about the good is the very f i rst principle of natural law, Aquinas implies that all the prescriptions of the natural law must f i t the teleological structure that he has described in his discussion of the ultimate end. 
- Aquinas claims that natural inclination leads us not only to the first principle, that good is to be pursued and evil avoided, but also to some more definite principles. He divides these secondary principles into four groups: 
    1. The highest precepts:
        - About self-preservation (same for all natural substances) 
        - About satisfaction and control of desires (same for all animals) 
        - About social life (same for all rational animals) 
    2. Precepts (such as those in the Decalogue) easily reached from the highest precepts.
    3. Subordinate precepts requiring more reflexion, derived as conclusions from premisses.
    4. Precepts derived as determinations rather than conclusions.
- Rational agents has duties for themselves
- Aquinas remarks, for instance, that self-regarding precepts are more diff i cult to recognize as duties, but our awareness of them is less dimmed by sin than is the awareness of other-regarding precepts. We more readily recognize them as the source of virtues if we are arguing from the ultimate end to the virtuous character. 
- We have found so far that Aquinas is not a ‘natural law moralist’, since he does not try to explain morality from some prior conception of law.⁷⁸ His view about the connexion of moral principles to natural law does not imply that ethics should be cast in legal form—that, for instance, the actions required by each of the virtues can be fully expressed in a set of rules that are determinate enough to serve as guides for action applicable to particular cases.
Aquinas believes that some specif i c legal precepts can be defended by appeal to natural law, but he does not commit himself to the further claim that a def i nite set of such precepts specif i es the entire content of the virtues. Nor does it imply that the right moral system is ultimately deontological, resting on a set of principles requiring types of action or states of character without reference to any further goal.
- Aquinas conceives the will as rational desire. In asserting the primacy of the will against the passions, he asserts the primacy of rational against irrational desire; but he does not intend to assert the primacy of reason over desire. A proper conception of the will must include both a cognitive and a desiring element; and we must neither assume that all rational desire is simply the product of instrumental reasoning directed towards a non-rational desire nor reduce the desire in rational desire to a mere product or epiphenomenon of practical reason. He claims that the will is, on the one hand, rational desire and, on the other, rational by participation in reason. Aquinas, then, does not want to reduce will to practical reason, or to suggest that practical reason motivates without desire. This extreme rationalist position would reduce virtue to knowledge, as Socrates did (ST 1-2 q58 a2). In opposing this extreme rationalist view, Aquinas urges that something needs to be added to knowledge if we are to explain the role of practical reason in a human being’s action.
- It would be just about possible to interpret Aquinas as a sort of anti-rationalist, if we focussed exclusively on his claims about our grasp of the ultimate end; for he agrees that we do not have any choice about whether to prescribe the pursuit of this to the will. 
- Types of reson:
    - Practical Reasons:
        - Synderesis aka Universal Conscience — The correct ends for human life are fixed, and are the objects of our natural inclination, but grasped by practical reason. Deals with universal principles. Always correct, even in bad people. 
        - Particular Conscience — practical reason that follows the desire for the end and finds means to that end. This sort of practical reason belongs to prudence. Deals with particular principles. Prudence is what made people be good at it
- To explain the extent of error, Aquinas distinguishes the common f i rst principles, which are always valid and always recognized by everyone, from the secondary precepts, which have exceptions and are not always recognized by everyone. The common f i rst principle of acting in accordance with reason is always valid and always recognized, and hence never lost through error. The precept of returning deposits follows from this common f i rst principle as a precept valid for most cases; but it has some exceptions, and people can be in error about it.²² Passions or bad habits or a bad natural condition may distort one’s grasp of a secondary precept; 
- Aquinas suggests that the destructible precepts are those that have exceptions. The rule of restoring deposits has genuine exceptions, and we need to reason about the cases in which it ought not to be followed. Since there is room for such reasoning, there is also room for us to mislead ourselves into thinking the principle is never valid, or that the exceptions are so numerous that we need not restore deposits except when it suits us. The true belief that the precept has exceptions gives an opening for the sophistical and self-serving reasoning (explicit or implicit) that challenges the precept even on the occasions when it should be observed. 
- Acceptance of the very f i rst principle, that good is to be done and evil avoided, is not a merely anthropological or psychological fact, but a def i ning feature of a rational agent. Similarly, someone who did not accept any principle of acting in accord with reason would be unwilling to consider an action with reference to what is good all things considered; and someone who did not consider actions from this point of view would not be a rational agent at all. 
- Nobody thinks that rational agents should simply be treated either as mere resources for securing his ends or as mere obstacles in his way. But somebody may thinks that they are allowed to make an exception to this general attitude. 
- Types of bad people:
    - Incontinence - pursues good aims, but fails to acquire them in practise, because of his desires
    - Viscious - recognizes good universal principles, but thinks that he found an exception to them, not because of a good inquery, but because of ignorance of these universal principles, caused by his desires
- Basic principles lack the sort of moral content that would allow us to say that we grasp them by intuition and deduction. 
- Our tendency to draw mistaken conclusions from the most common principles is the reason why God revealed the Decalogue to us
- Temperance - you should not deviate from reason because of appetites
- Bravery - you should not deviate from the correct judgment of reason because of fear or rashness
- Since the natural law includes specif i c principles that are not within the scope of universal conscience, we need the intellectual virtue that grasps them.
- It is reasonable to impose whatever control over appetite is needed for action in accordance with reason
- Prudence ensures the right motive for the action; for the prudent person’s deliberation about happiness results in the right determinate conception of happiness, and this conception forms the end of the virtuous person’s actions. Aquinas follows Aristotle not only in claiming that prudence requires the moral virtues (1-2 q57 a4;
q58 a3; a5), but also in claiming that they require prudence. His reason for the second claim is Aristotelian. Moral virtue requires not only the right action, but also the right way of doing it. The right way of doing it must proceed from reason, not only from impulse or passion;⁴⁶ to proceed from reason it must proceed from correct election. 
- Those who do the generous action from the right motive are not generous because they believe that the generous action will have precisely this effect on the other person, but because they act on their settled conviction about the value of this sort of action. Their conviction expresses the agent’s conception of the ends worth pursuing, not simply her views about the most effective way to reach the ends she has set herself
- Universal conscience can't grasp the ends of the virtues. We need prudence for it. Hence, we are free to be virtuous or viscous
- Universal conscience recognizes that good is to be done and evil avoided, and that we achieve the good in acting in accordance with reason
- We do not aim at the best satisfaction of our desires. We aim at perfection
- Deliberation shows that the moral precepts of the Decalogue are required by the virtues, and that we have reason to care about the interests of other people for their own sakes. 
- All other virtues besides the cardinal ones, are parts of the cardinal ones
- By organizing the virtues around the cardinal virtues, Aquinas argues that the virtues do not conf l ict, and especially that recognized ‘pagan’ virtues do not conf l ict with ‘Christian’ virtues. 
- Magnanimity strengthens us in the pursuit of appropriately great actions
- Humility restrains us from the distractions that would result from illusions about our own importance;
- If we object to magnanimity because it includes contempt for others, Aquinas answers that this contempt is contempt for the evil aims of others. 
- Cardinal virtues are always same. Others may change over time
- temperate person does what is f i tting for a human being, as opposed to a non-rational creature 
- He rejects the Stoic doctrine that the honestum is the only good. He agrees that it is the principal human good, because it belongs to reason, which is principal in a human being; but since it is not the only human good, sorrow can reasonably be directed to the loss of non-moral goods
- Aquinas, therefore, treats honestas (also translated as fine, as opposite to the pleasant and utility) as moral goodness, a good that is discovered by reason, specifying what f i ts rational nature, and not only good for the individual, but also meritorious because of its contribution to the common good maintained by justice. 
- As we will see, he recognizes the cumulative importance of Aquinas’ scattered remarks, and presents a connected account of moral rightness (honestas) as fitness to rational nature.
- Once we see that he is committed to an account of moral virtue that gives this central place to the impartial, rational outlook concerned with the common good, we can ask more precise questions about his description of prudence and its relation to the moral virtues. 
- While both types of justice are concerned with our relations to other people, general justice is properly concerned with directing different people’s actions towards a common good, whereas special justice is concerned with the relations of one individual to another.
- There is 2 type of justice :
    - Special - he don't agrees with Aristotle that it is concerned only with external goods 
    - General 
- He takes it for granted that general justice considers the good of individuals mediately (2-2 q58 a7 ad1), and he does not suggest that the common good might conflict with the good of this or that particular individual. 
- Prudence arranges actions to aim at the ultimate end, but brave people do not focus directly on this end in particular actions; they aim to act appropriately for their state of character.
- Eudaemonist deliberation justifies the cultivation of bravery as a virtue, but it does not replace the normal reflexions of the brave person facing a particular choice. 
- It is plausible to suppose that when we form the proximate ends proper to friendship and justice, we will limit reflexion on the ultimate good. For we may find that we can achieve these proximate ends only if we pursue them for their own sake without further reflexion on their effects. This conclusion does not conflict with Aquinas’ eudaemonism 
- vicious people do not love themselves more than virtuous people love themselves; they have the wrong conception of the self who is appropriately loved. For good people love themselves as rational agents, whereas bad ones love themselves as the ones who can feel pleasure
- Often, people say tgat the God is a cause of sin, because he do not prevent sin. Aquinas answers that if dentist doesn't kidnapped me and heal my tooth - it doesn't mean that dentist is the cause of my teeth hurt. So, we must firstly find whether God must prevent us from sin. And though God can prevent us from sin with his grace, he doesn't do this. 
- God is the cause of all our actions in the sense that he is the source of our ability to act good or bad; but he not the source of our bad or good actions as bad or as good. It is like our ability to move is a source of all of our walking. But our broken leg (not the ability to move) is the source of our particular limp walking. 
- By achieving the proportionate good, we take a step towards achieving the good that is proper to human nature, but we cannot achieve that whole human good by our natural ability.
- God is a cause of that we sin statistically. But God isn't the cause of particular sin. 
- Holy Spirit only goves to us best arguments. Arguments that we will choose by ourselves
- One sort of happiness is proportionate to human nature, which human beings are capable of achieving through principles of their own nature. Another sort is a happiness exceeding human nature, which a human being can achieve only by divine power, by some sort of sharing in divinity. Aquinas believes, as Aristotle does, that ‘through a virtue a human being is perfected for the acts by which he is directed towards happiness’; and so, since there are two kinds of happiness, two kinds of virtues direct us towards them. Since the second kind of happiness is beyond human ability, the virtue that directs us towards it is also beyond our ability, and hence is infused in us by the grace of God (1-2 q62 a1). This kind of virtue supports Augustine’s claim that ‘the whole life of unbelievers is sin, and nothing is good without the highest good’ (q63 a2 obj1). Aquinas believes Augustine’s claim is false of the acquired virtues, but true of the infused virtues 
- The three primary infused virtues are the theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity.
They turn us towards supernatural happiness in so far as they turn us immediately to God.
Since supernatural happiness is our complete and unqualified ultimate good, the virtues that are infused with charity are the only complete and unqualified virtues; for moral virtue requires prudence, and complete prudence has to be directed towards the right ultimate end, which is set by charit 
- The acquired and the infused virtues have the same matter. Temperance seeks the mean in the enjoyment of physical pleasures; as we discover further ends that are promoted by restraint in this enjoyment, we discover further reasons for restraint. If, for instance, an athlete needs to eat a lighter meal to stay in training or a scholar needs to eat a lighter meal to keep a clear head, they discover different applications for temperance. This is why the infused moral virtues are still called by the names of the acquired moral virtues, even though they differ in species, because of their different objects
- We are free, because though we always choose the best option, we may turn our attention to some aspects of the X (that actually isn't the best option) that will make X seems the best option (of course, X should actually have them) 
- Aquinas’ intellectualism, therefore, supports compatibilism 
- Aquinas’ account of human freedom in relation to external causal influences depends heavily on his distinctions among types of causes. Provided that the proximate cause is in the will responding in the right way to the merits of the situation, the fact that the will’s response is itself the product of external causal influences does not seem to him to compromise human freedom; it simply has to be connected to human action by the right sort of causal chain. Aquinas relies on this distinction to argue that external causal influences such as the passions, human nature, external events, the Devil, and God do not threaten human freedom 
- he denies that the will is the subject of bravery and temperance. He allows only that it is the subject of virtues aiming at some external good, directed towards God or one’s neighbour 
- Aquinas does not claim that knowledge is all that is needed for virtue. He argues that we must also be turned towards the right ends, and that therefore virtue requires a good state of the passions (1-2 q56 a4 ad4). Since the passions present some goods to us in an especially attractive way, we can be diverted from our conviction about what is best by the particular attractions offered by the passions. 
- Neither Aristotle nor Aquinas treats the operations of prudence as simply theoretical reasoning that may or may not move the agent. Prudence includes a motivational aspect because it begins its deliberation from the agent’s desire for happiness, and discovers ways to fulfil that desire. From Aquinas’ point of view, someone who grasps all the precepts of prudence but does not act on them has failed to grasp clearly and steadily the connexion between these actions and his own happiness.
- since both the virtuous and the vicious person aim at happiness, the difference between them reflects their different conceptions of happiness. 
- The principles of the natural law, according to Aquinas, support the precepts of justice, because they show that the precepts of justice are best all things considered; but, according to the voluntarist, God is free to reject what is best all things considered; hence God is free to violate the precepts of justice. 
- He claims that universal prudence grasps the components of happiness, and thereby fixes (praestituere) the end for the moral virtues.²⁵ Given this conception of universal prudence, and given Aquinas’ conception of the will and its relation to the good, prudence is responsible for the distinctively virtuous condition of the will. Since the will aims necessarily at the ultimate good, and since prudence discovers the constitution of this good, the will of a prudent person necessarily pursues the distinctively virtuous end that prudence has discovered. We can distinguish the cognitive contribution of prudence from the motive contribution of the will;
but, given Aquinas’ eudaemonism, the right direction of the will follows from the discovery of the constitution of the ultimate end. Since prudence is necessary and sufficient for virtue, the virtuous person differs cognitively from the incontinent, continent, and vicious person. 
- God is free, because, although God can't do bad things, God sees more than 1 equally Good things, but acts only for the one of them.
- Aquinas argues that the supposition of a dispensation from natural law involves a contradiction, because it requires us to say both that the action is due (debitum), as required by the natural law, and that it is not due, insofar as God’s dispensation permits us not to do it.⁹⁶ 
- In assigning this basic status to natural law, however, Aquinas does not make it prior to his teleological argument from the final good and human action to the virtues. On the contrary, the argument from the basic principles of natural law just is this teleological argument. The introduction of natural law provides a new description of the argument that has already been given; it does not provide a different sort of argument, let alone an argument for different conclusions. Aquinas’ explanation of natural law implies that facts about rational nature are the basis of the precepts of natural law. If we take natural law just to consist in these facts, natural law is not prior to facts about rational nature.
- Aquinas and his successors, therefore, do not seem to be natural-law moralists. Though they take the precepts of natural law to include fundamental moral principles, they do not take moral facts to be reducible to facts about natural law. On the contrary, Aquinas takes facts about natural law to consist in those facts about rational nature that underlie his account of the virtues
- In Aquinas’ view, a rule belongs to natural law because it is morally right and prescribes what ftis rational nature. Even for positive law, his test of validity is not purely procedural; it must have been enjoined by legitimate authority, but it must also be just. It is even more obvious that for natural law moral rightness is prior to any legislation. The basic principles underlying legal validity, therefore, are indicative laws, moral principles that do not rely on moral necessity imposed by will. 
- Aquinas’ conception of freewill is consistent with the compatibilist arguments against Bramhall.
- the degree of happiness that we can achieve in this life is incomplete
- Aquinas, for instance, clearly believes that the outlook we form under the influence of our passions misleads us about what is worth pursuing in life. 
- Aquinas does not believe that if God’s existence is necessary and everything else depends on God, there cannot be any freedom in the world. For, in his view, God creates secondary causes that have a causal role appropriate for their type of agency, and this role allows contingency.¹⁶ Aquinas does not claim that secondary causes make themselves undetermined or self-determining. He claims that God makes them and the rest of the universe in such a way that what happens to them depends on their states—sensory or rational. Since they are not necessitated by the rest of the universe apart from their sensory and rational states, they determine things contingently. Aquinas is free to say that God necessarily makes things such that they are necessitated to be secondary causes, and sources of contingent events. 
- Aquinas believe in contingency without indeterminism 
- God is capable of intellectual love without passions, because love belongs to God’s will.
- He takes the end to be not the greatest quantity of good, but the common good of all rational beings. We might take the common good to be the quantity of good that is composed of the quantities present in the lives of different agents; in that case, what promotes the common good may not promote the good of all, or even of most, individual agents. But this is not the only way to understand a common good. We might also understand it to refer to a good that is good for everyone in common, and not good for one person to the exclusion of others. This is how Aquinas understands the common good.³⁵ 
- He takes the end to be not the greatest quantity of good, but the common good of all rational beings. We might take the common good to be the quantity of good that is composed of the quantities present in the lives of different agents; in that case, what promotes the common good may not promote the good of all, or even of most, individual agents. But this is not the only way to understand a common good. We might also understand it to refer to a good that is good for everyone in common, and not good for one person to the exclusion of others. This is how Aquinas understands the common good.³⁵ We have good reason to understand Cumberland’s claims about the common good in this second way. He claims that it is the whole of which individual goods are parts; that is why individual goods do not conflict in principle with the common good (though they may conflict because of some defect in a particular society). The common good is the end on which rational beings can agree and ought to agree. Since it is assumed that individual rational beings care about their individual goods, they have a reason to agree on the pursuit of a common good that embraces all the individual goods that they take to be reasonable objects of pursuit for different individuals. They have no similar reason, as far as we can gather from Cumberland, to sacrifcie some people’s individual goods simply to increase a total good that is indifferent to distribution. 
- For if a course of action would maximize the total good, but would harm some people simply to achieve this end, it would not achieve a common good, and Cumberland has no reason to endorse it. Hence questions that might be raised about the quantitative and distributive aspects of a utilitarian view do not arise for his view. 









# Difficulties

-  Aquinas does not describe the inclination in much detail.⁸⁰ In particular, he does not make it clear how a bare inclination towards society supports a demand to treat others on some basis of equality. This lack of detail in Aquinas corresponds to a similar gap in Aristotle, who also fails to explain fully why the other-regarding virtue of justice must be included among the virtues that are necessary for an agent’s happiness.⁸¹
- Aquinas’ intellectualism makes compatibilism attractive. The determination of will by intellect is compatible with indeterminism about freewill; perhaps the will is determined by the intellect, but we act freely only if the conclusion of the intellect is not causally necessitated.⁸² This view, however, is unstable. Aquinas suggests that we have freewill because we deliberate about alternatives, and the result of our deliberation affects our choice and action.
This is his explanation of the intuitions that suggest that freedom requires some ability to do otherwise. If his explanation is correct, these intuitions do not require incompatibilism;
hence we undermine one argument to show that the ability to do otherwise must include an indeterministic process. 
- According to Aquinas’ account of human nature and the law of nature, an appeal to the state of nature helps to explain the moral constraints on the formation of a state.
For characteristics of human nature explain why it is reasonable to form a state; and the provisions of the law of nature determine the sorts of powers that people can legitimately assign to the state 