# Thesesis

- Reciprocity of the virtues - each virtue requires each of the others
- Virtues are necessary for happiness (but not sufficient)
- Virtue is a state in which one performs one’s function well. Hence a virtue is a state in which one makes the correct rational choice of ends, and chooses correctly the actions that are to be chosen for their own sakes. 
- Practical reason is a part or element in the end, not simply a means to it. Moreover, the relevant sort of practical reason is the rational selection and choice of components of the human good.
- Wisdom is not an only Instrumental Good, but it is not Happiness
- Feiendship = type of love for persons as non-instrumental concern for the good of others
- The supremacy of reasons based on one’s own good for being moral both psychologically and rationally.
- Virtue promotes happiness more than the vice does
- The best life is also the pleasantest life
- if we have one virtue we have all the virtues
- Plato's division of the soul is true
- Happiness = highest good
- Happiness is composite
- According to one reasonable interpretation, he argues that happiness is a composite good, and that the virtues are dominant parts of it.
- Aristotle, however, distinguishes two sorts of goal-directed actions: 
    - production (poiˆ esis) aims at some end other than the production itself, 
    - ‘action’ or ‘activity’ (praxis) ‘good action itself is the end’
- A virtue of character is ‘a state that decides’. 
- Decision is the product of wish and deliberation. It is a central feature of responsible action and of virtue. In requiring the right decision, Aristotle seeks to describe the rational element in virtue. 
- we decide on actions as promoting ends, not as ends themselves, but he also insists that the virtuous person decides on the virtuous action for its own sake. This paradox dissolves, and the coherence of Aristotle’s position becomes clear, once we apply the distinction between production and activity to Aristotle’s claims about decision:  The virtuous person decides on virtuous actions as activities that in themselves, not simply through their consequences, partly achieve the end.
- He uses dialectical method: he tries to resolve conflicts in commom knowledge about ethics
- ... [it is the same] Cognitive state as prudence (phronesis), which deliberates about what promotes happiness as a whole
- Political science is a sort of an practical science where we tries to find the highest end and so we cannot appeal to any higher end to give us a definite conception of our end. It uses a dialectical inquery for that.  Political science is practical rather than productive, because it is concerned with ‘action’ (praxis) and not simply with ‘production’ or ‘making’ (poiesis). 
- Action is itself the end that we aim at, not a mere means to some end external to it. If we are trying to f i nd the appropriate form of non-instrumental action, we cannot simply consider its causal consequences for the production of some external end; we need to see how it can non-instrumentally realize an end that it partly constitutes.
- There is 1 final end  that is human goodness of the rational agents (opposed to a non-rational desires) aka happiness
- General justice - other regarding virtue
- Descision = rational desire
- Psychological egoism is true (every person pursue hers own happiness)
- the virtuous person’s life is also the pleasantest life, because pleasure makes live happier, but pleasure is not only thing that makes live happier. Also, virtues makes virtues people less depenfend on external circumstances (but, not independent of them, which is impossible)
- He recognizes pleasure, honour, understanding and virtue as non-instrumental goods (1097b2–4). If he accepts a comprehensive conception of happiness, he regards these goods as components of happiness.
- We choose non-instrumental goods for the sake of happiness, but may choose for they own sake if we can't pursue all of them at once
- the wellfare of my friends, family and fellow-citizens are the parts of my own wellfare (not becase it may affect my wellfare)
- A human being’s function is activity of the rational soul; hence a human being’s good is activity of the rational soul in accordance with complete virtue
- Functions of X = essence of X
- Function = goal-directed motion or state. A motion or state is goal-directed when it has a final cause aka ‘end’. A final cause is the real or apparent good whose presence explains the occurrence of the motion or state in question.
- The function of a whole organism is what Aristotle describes as a life
- The Function Argument does not show, and is not intended to show, that happiness consists in performing the activity that is most distinctive of human beings in relation to other organisms. It connects a human being’s good with the characteristic and distinctive features of a rational agent’s life as opposed to the life of other agents
- Something unnatural (medical pills) may be 'in accordance' with one's nature
- Human function consists in rational choice of actions valued for their own sakes. A life devoted to the pursuit of ends that do not result from rational choice of ends does not fulfil the human function, even if the agent exercises reason in deliberation about instrumental means to those ends.
- Plato's conception of the soul is true
- different moral virtues are different ways in which we fulf i l our nature as rational agents in a life guided by non-instrumental practical reasoning.
- virtuous people do not achieve happiness simply because they attach supreme value to virtuous action; they achieve it only in so far as virtuous action actually meets the appropriate conditions for happiness. These conditions include completeness, self-suff i ciency, and realization of a human being’s practical rationality
- Virtues are the different ways in which the non-rational part accepts the guidance of the rational part.
- Happiness consists in part in theoretical ‘study’ or ‘contemplation’ (theˆ oria), grasping the ultimate universal truths about the universe
- According to the Function Argument, the different virtues should be forms of control by the rational part in the choice of ends
- We fulf i l our function by acting in accordance with both prudence and virtue of characte
- Mere agreement between rational and non-rational parts of the soul are not sufficient to be virtuous, because vicious person also has this agreement
- For a normal and natural human emotion such as anger, four possibilities are open: 
    1. Indulgence, leaving it completely unchecked. 
    2. Suppression, as far as possible.
    3. Control, as far as possible.
    4. Harmony and agreement with the rational part. It is the best option. It means that if you have some justified inclination for anger, but you understand that it is not the best time for it, you will feel inclination, but it will be small. And it is better than not to feel it. Also, in some situations, I must feel regret for my doibgs
- a life of action (praxis) of the rational part - he takes the distinctively human function to consist not merely in the use of reason, and not merely in the use of reason to select one action over another, but also in the use of reason in praxis, in action chosen for its own sake
- For if someone who abstains from bodily pleasures enjoys the abstinence itself, he is temperate; if he is grieved by it, he is intemperate. Again, if he stands f i rm against terrifying situations and enjoys it, or at least does not f i nd it painful, he is brave; if he f i nds it painful, he is cowardly
- this is relevant to virtue of character, because the ‘sign’ of virtue is the appropriate pleasure
- Her belief that the actions are just and temperate is necessary for her pleasure in them, and she would be ashamed and dismayed if she failed to choose them. If the ‘life of pleasure’ is the life of the mercenary pleasure-seeker who does not care what he does as long as it brings him the appropriate further rewards, it is not the outlook of the virtuous person
- Virtue is a state (hexis) rather than a feeling, because virtue is praiseworthy (1105b31), whereas simply having a certain kind of feeling is not praiseworthy. Aristotle seems to suggest that simply having a feeling concentrated on the right object is not suff i cient for being praiseworthy. Virtue of character is a state that elects, consisting in a mean determined by reason, and by the reason by which the prudent person would determine it.
- Pleasure has a non-instrumental value, but its non-instrumental value depends on the activity by which it was taken
- Temperance is an abstention from wrong pleasures
- Vicious action for the sake of pleasures
- Virtuous person acts for the sake of good actions themselves,based on evaluative judgement
- happiness is not only comprehensive (includes every non-instrumental good), but also composite (including these various goods as its parts)
- In that case the claim that we choose justice for its own sake does not conf l ict with the claim that we choose it for the sake of happiness; on the contrary, each claim partly explains the other. For choosing justice as a means to happibess may be a way of choosing justice as an end in itself, not as purely instrumental to happiness, because happiness is a sum of all non-instrumented goods
- Praxis = non-instrumental action chosen for its own sake
- Deliberation is not about ends, in so far as it must begin with some end in view; the means that deliberation f i nds to promote that f i rst end is an end in itself, if deliberation f i nds that it is a component of the f i rst end. Moral deliberation begins with some conception of happiness, and deliberates until we f i nd the states of character that are components of happiness. If we deliberate correctly, we f i nd the moral virtues, and we elect these for their own sakes.
- Aristotle distinguishes wish from spirit and appetite, which are also desires for ends.
Wish = desire that is not formed under the stimulus of some immediate pain, need, or provocation of the sort that produces the desires of appetite and spirit. This sort of desire can be trained to conform to reason, in so far as it can more easily be trained to focus on more remote objects and is less tied to immediate satisfactions. Still, it belongs, as the other desires do, to the desiring part, which is inherently non-rational, though it is capable of following reason. For wish is not simply a desire for an end; it is also a rational desire aiming at the good. Aristotle suggests that the primary object of wish is happiness (EN 1111b26–30);⁴⁷ hence the virtuous person’s election is based on a wish for one’s own happiness, and deliberation about how to achieve it.
- Our explanation of wish and election rests on the assumption that we can deliberate about the components of happiness, and that the desire we reach as a result of this deliberation is a wish.
- Prudence has a wide scope. It deliberates about what contributes to living well as a whole (1140a28). It begins with nothing more specif i c than ‘living well as a whole’, and so it has to f i nd the different things that promote living well. These include (according to Aristotle) the virtues that are components of happiness.⁵⁵ In so far as prudent people carry out this deliberation, they do the sort of thing that Aristotle announces as the task of political science (said to be the same state as prudence
- the role of virtue is to get the right end, and the role of prudence is to f i nd the things contributing to the end
- virtue of character with a state that elects. Since election rests on deliberation about the composition of the ultimate end, not simply about instrumental means to it, the virtuous person’s election results from a distinctive conception of what is non-instrumentally valuable. Control by the rational part, therefore, includes acceptance of a distinctive set of ends grasped by practical reason.
- responsibility is not merely causation by desire (voluntare action); responsible agents must also somehow control their desires.
- If I feel pleasure, I ALWAYS did something responsible (even if cause was external). While if I felt pain - I am ALWAYS not responsible. He argues that if I act because of ignorance, and do not regret my action, I have acted non-voluntarily, but not involuntarily; involuntary action requires regret as well as ignorance (1110b18–24; The principle is strictly ‘in us’ only in so far as it is in our rational agency; otherwise it will only be incidentally in us, since one of our non-essential features will be the principle. But the strong of our appetites is inrelation to our deliberation: either because we raised bad habbits ourselves or because we do not prevent the raise a bad habbits.
- For this causal origin is also present in non-rational animals; reference to it does not explain why non-rational animals are not praiseworthy and cannot develop virtues of character. Since animals and childrens are not capable of deliberation - their habits and appetites are not connected with reason and are not therefore responsible for their action
- incontinence requires ignorance.
- We may say that the non-rational part exercises local control if on a particular occasion its desires move us contrary to our rational aims, but it exercises global control to the extent that its desires are the basis of our aims. Incontinence involves local control by non-rational desires, and failure of local control by rational desires. But if we form our rational desires simply by considering ways to satisfy our non-rational desires, we display complete local control by a rational part that is subject to the global control of the non-rational part. This is what vicious people do
- The fact that avoiding danger involves betraying a worthwhile cause because of unjustif i ed fear is what makes it vicious, but this is not the feature that makes it appealing to a vicious person. So, vicious people don't choose vicious action because it vicious. So, they are totally controlled by non-rational part
- But my preference for F expresses my values (principles) if it is false that equal satisfaction of my preference for G would by itself make the replacement unobjectionable to me.
- The vicious person regards advantage as the only concern of practical reason, since he believes that his inclinations are beyond rational criticism, so that practical reason can only serve his inclinations.
- To elect is to choose on the basis of one’s conception of happiness; to elect something because it is f i ne is to choose it for itself because of its value apart from one’s own inclinations.
- Vicious man does not have a self-love (actually, self-satisfaction), for his previous actions can't give him satisfaction, because they are only instrumentally valued (for bringing pleasure). In constrast, virtious people may satisfy himself, because his ptevious actions was good.
- Vice expresses the incorrect election that embodies the agreement of the rational and non-rational parts under the local control of the rational part, but the global control of the non-rational part.
- the agent’s being virtuous explains the act’s being right, and the reverse is not true.
- the action may be temperate, just and so on, even if the agent is not virtuous
- virtues: bravery, temperance, justice, generosity, magnificence, and wit.
- Moreover, he insists that we cannot find fixed and exceptionless rules that always allow us to identify virtuous actions in particular situations; we have to be content with things that are usually true
- Good is whar virtuous person thinks is good
- He believes that the value of achieving the common good contributes to explaining why the virtuous person wants to promote it,but the value of trying to achieve it is not exhausted by the instrumental value of the tendency of virtue to achieve it.
To support this claim, Aristotle argues: (1) The appropriate form of rational activity fulf i ls the agent’s function and so promotes the agent’s own happiness. (2) Active concern for the common good is this appropriate form of rational activity. (3) Having this active concern for the common good is having the virtues of character. (4) Hence having the virtues of character promotes the agent’s happiness.
- For he also claims that virtue as a whole is the same as general justice (1129b25). General justice is not co-ordinate with each of the specif i c virtues. Rather, it is in some way identical to virtue as a whole; special justice is an expression of general justice, but so is each of the other virtues. General justice is the complete exercise of complete virtue (1129b30–1), and complete virtue in relation to another person (1129b27). General justice and complete virtue are the same state of character, but ‘their being is not the same’ (1130a12). General justice prescribes the actions that are prescribed by the right laws, and these are the actions that promote and maintain happiness and its parts for the political community (1129b17–19). Hence those who believe that virtue conf l icts with one’s own happiness point to general justice. Aristotle grees with  Thrasymachus’ claim that justice is another’s good (Plato, R. 343c3). And it seems to be true for a virtue that is defined by its reference to the benefit of another.
- general justice completes virtue because we show that we have virtue by using it in our relations to others;
many people can manage to behave virtuously in what concerns themselves, but fail in their relations to others
- Aristotle rejects the possibility of a conflict between virtuoues
- prudence grasps the content of happiness
- To claim that an action is just is to claim that it promotes happiness for the political community. To claim that it is f i ne is to claim that it is intrinsically good and praiseworthy. The basis for both these claims is the claim that the action promotes the common good.
- Temperance - the appropriate regulation of these appetites does not consist simply in preventing them from harming oneself. Aristotle believes that we have reached the mean that constitutes temperance only if we have adjusted our own appetites and pleasures to the interests of others as well as ourselves.
- Generocity is a virtue
- magnanimous person is concerned with the f i ne and the common good. He recognizes the priority of virtue and the f i ne in his attitude to external goods. He cares about honour, but only for virtuous actions; and since he cares most about acting virtuously, he does not think honour, or any other external good, is very important (1124a12–17). The greatest reward that other people can give him is the greatest honour, but he knows that he deserves this only if he knows that virtue deserves the greatest honour. He knows this only if he also knows that virtue is the greatest of the goods that compose happiness, greater than honour or any other external good. The magnanimous person takes a ‘moderate’ (metrios) attitude to all external goods, so that he is neither overjoyed by good fortune nor excessively grieved by misfortune (1124a15–16); he is therefore calm in the face of misfortune (1100b31–2, eukolˆ os).
- Happy people can lose their happiness, but retain their virtue, and therefore will remain happier than they would be if they had retained the other goods without virtue. 
- A magnanimous person believes that if extra goods of fortune are added to a happy person’s life, they make it happier, both because they themselves adorn it and because his use of them is f i ne and virtuous (1100b26–8). He recognizes that the external goods are desirable adornments, and he uses them properly to become more virtuous. He does not compromise the supremacy of virtue; Aristotle insists that ‘in reality only the good person is honourable’. He does not guide his life by reference to another person, with the crucial exception of a friend (1124b31–1125a2).
- He rejects the common view that the virtuous person’s concern for the f i ne and the common good involves some sacrif i ce of happiness; though he recognizes that this concern may involve the loss of some signif i cant components of happiness, he maintains that it always secures the dominant component of happiness.
- By this he does not simply mean that there is some description of the virtuous action under which it is choiceworthy for its own sake. The action of wearing part of the tread off my shoe might be choiceworthy for its own sake in so far as it coincides with going for a walk; but in that case it would not be true that I choose wearing down my shoe, as such, for its own sake.
- The references to a common good, to general justice, and to a community suggest that we should attend to Aristotle’s account of friendship, since this is the virtue appropriate to communities, and itself includes the perfection of justice (1155a22–8; 1159b25–1160a8).
- Aristotle certainly agrees that the happy life must include friendship; and we might expect his defence of friendship to supply a defence of justice and of the moral component of the virtues.
- If virtue is to be justif i ed by reference to happiness, it must be itself a component of happiness, not merely advantageous as a means to it.
- Aristotle, however, recognizes three main types of friendship. One aims at pleasure, one at advantage. The third involves goodwill to the other in his own right, and concern for the other for the other’s own sake
- To see what kind of concern Aristotle has in mind, we may distinguish some different possibilities: (1) In unself i sh concern A wants to do x for B, simply because B wants x done or because it would be better for B, not because A gains any further benef i t from doing x. A shows this concern for B if A moves to one side to avoid walking over B’s gouty toes, when A has nothing else to gain by doing this. This is the unself i sh sentiment whose reality Butler and Hume (e.g.) defend against the psychological egoism of Hobbes.⁴³ (2) In other-directed concern, A wants to do x for B for B’s own sake, not for A’s sake. Aristotle describes this attitude as ‘goodwill’ (eunoia). (3) In intrinsic concern, A wants to do x for B because of B in B’s own right, because of who B is.
Aristotle’s account of friendship does not discuss unself i sh concern, but considers other-directed and intrinsic concern. In his view, other-directed concern requires intrinsic concern, and is therefore conf i ned to the best type of friendship. Other-directed concern for a person is concern for him because he is the person he is. Aristotle explains ‘the person he is’ as ‘the sort of person he is’ and ‘the sort of character he has’. He infers that love of the other person for his own sake is love of him for the character he has. But only the virtuous person loves another person for his character; and the only person he loves for his character is another virtuous person. Hence the friendship between virtuous people embodies other-directed concern (1156b7–12). Such concern is absent from other friendships; for non-virtuous people care about a friend not for himself (i.e., what he essentially is), but for some coincidental property of him, and therefore do not care about him for his own sake.⁴⁴
- Aristotle now has a reason to deny that non-virtuous people can be concerned about a friend for his own sake. These people are friends for advantage and pleasure. They may be willing to do what a friend wants, simply because she wants it, and not because of any further benef i t to themselves; but they do this only because they look on the friend as a source of pleasure or advantage. They do not rely on any conception of the friend herself and of her welfare, as distinct from her desires; hence their concern for her is not guided by any concern for her welfare.
If, then, we are concerned for the other as the person he is, we must try to satisfy or develop the desires that promote his good; we will count some desires for less because they are transitory, or express relatively superf i cial aspects of himself, or rest on mistaken views about his good. Concern for the other for his own sake must be concern for the other as the particular rational agent that she is.
- We can now see how one person can regard another person as ‘another self’, in Aristotle’s special sense, and we can distinguish this relation from relations that might be confused with it. I do not regard you as another self if I do not distinguish you from myself; for in that case I would not regard you as another. Moreover, I cannot regard you as another self if I regard you as nothing more than a part of myself; for in that case, I would not regard you as a self. To treat you as another self, I must regard your ends as I regard my own, and hence as worthy of consideration in their own right. Your ends belong to you, but since you are another self, I value them non-instrumentally, whether or not they promote my other ends. If I take this view of your ends in relation to mine, I act for your sake as well as for my own sake.
- Aristotle’s naturalist conception of one’s good rejects this appeal to self-suff i ciency. One’s good is not measured by the fulf i lment of one’s desires. In claiming that happiness requires the fulf i lment of one’s nature, he does not mean that one naturally has certain desires that are fulf i led by friendship, or that one naturally has needs that cannot be satisf i ed without the instrumental contribution of friendship.
- He denies that we achieve our happiness by f i tting our desires to the opportunities available for fulf i lment; such an attitude is incompatible with his treatment of the virtues concerned with external goods.
- ¹ A friend is a further source of the sorts of actions that we enjoy and value when they are our own actions. What we f i nd pleasant and valuable in our own actions is the causal relation of our deliberation and choice to them. We enjoy our friend’s actions in the same way, because we have the same sort of causal relation to them. The other self extends our characteristically rational activities.
- Friendship not only increases situations for practical deliberation, it also increases its complexity and, therefore, makes our lifes even more ruled by reason with friendship
- Friendness is a virtue. It is when you deliberate about common good. And also when you see that some ends of non-virtuous fellow-citizens aims at the same ends as you
- If we regard another person’s views about the f i ne and good as worth considering in their own right, we regard that other person as being—to that extent—another self, and we are concerned about him for his own sake.
- Aristotle's doctrine fits good with the doctrine of a natural law, though he can't know about it
- To defend Aristotle, we need to see why loving the other person for his character as a virtuous person is not the same as loving him simply as one virtuous person among many. If a particular virtuous person has a particular way of being a virtuous person, a friend who loves that aspect of him does not simply love him as some virtuous person or other. Moreover, an Aristotelian theory must acknowledge that different virtuous people have different ways of being virtuous. For a virtuous person’s life is demanding enough to prescribe many actions that a single person cannot do if he chooses to do other virtuous actions. If love for a particular way of being a virtuous person is part of friendship for another virtuous person, it is clear why time and familiarity are required, and why the same friendship is not necessarily demanded for another equally virtuous person. It takes far more time to know the way in which this particular person is virtuous than it takes to recognize him as a virtuous person.
- My argument: friendship is mutual advantageous, because, if you gift your frirnd something instead of buing this for yourself, you both gain some good (e.g. +10 to yout friend and +5 to you), where in second variant only you gain some good (+10 to you)