- Argues against Augustinian claim that virtues of a pagans are actually sins
- The Aristotelian conception makes the grasp of natural law a part of the rational grasp of the ultimate end by rational agents.
- In ‘On nature itself’, he turns the theological argument back on his opponents; they diminish God’s creative power if they deny that God has created substances that are capable of initiating their own goal-directed movements. If we agree that God creates substances that are suffciiently complex to have natures and ends, we have some reason to agree that their nature also fixes what is good and right for them.³ 
- Leibniz suggests that his opponents’ view tends towards the occasionalism of Malebranche.⁴ Leibniz believes his opponents have to say: ‘ . . . things do not act but . . . God acts in the presence of things and according to the fitness of things, so that things are occasions, not causes, and merely receive but never effect or produce’ 
- Since Leibniz believes that the Scholastic outlook does not deserve to be wholly discarded, he agrees with those who take a Lutheran and a naturalist outlook to be compatible.
- In discussion with Bossuet, he suggests that differences between Protestants and Roman Catholics are not irreconcilable.⁸
- Leibniz revives the eudaemonism of Aristotelian ethics. He accepts it as a psychological doctrine; hence he claims that we always pursue our own good, and that allegedly incontinent action is really the result of ignorance of our good. Sometimes he appears to be a psychological egoist, and even a hedonist. He understands happiness (felicity) as ‘a lasting state of pleasure’.⁹ He understands love in the same way, but he allows it to include ‘disinterested’ love, which nonetheless is inseparable from one’s own pleasure.¹⁰
- Perhaps, then, Leibniz really means that happiness consists in pleasure taken in appropriate activities and states. If this is what he means, it is more intelligible to regard the object of the pleasure as part of one’s happiness. Hence it is more intelligible to regard the good of another person as a part of one’s own good. 
- Though Leibniz recognizes the possibility of love for another person for the other’s own sake, and hence of non-mercenary love, he does not identify this with purely disinterested love. He rejects any disinterested love that is separated from one’s concern for one’s own good. But his composite view of happiness allows love of another to be essential to one’s own good, and not simply instrumental to it; in this sense, Leibniz believes in disinterested love of God. 
- He complicates his views about motivation and reason still further by describing pleasure as the ‘sense’ of perfection. Here he suggests that perfection is the end and pleasure is just the sign of our having achieved it. If this is what he means, he avoids a purely hedonist conception of the ultimate end, and thereby allows a more intelligible notion of disinterested concern. His modifications of hedonism help to explain why Leibniz is sympathetic to traditional eudaemonism, which treats disinterested concern for another as part of one’s own good. He shares this sympathy with Shaftesbury, and so endorses some of Shaftesbury’s defence of unselfsih moral attitudes.
- Leibniz’s conception of one’s good as involving one’s own perfection allows concern for the good of others for their own sake. He believes that one’s own good also requires such concern for the good of others. This is the basis of goodness and benefcience.¹⁷ These connexions between goodness, perfection, and justice imply that if we have a true conception of our own good, we also seek the good of others for its own sake. This is why enlightened concern for the perfection of the intelligent substance that is myself leads to concern for the perfection of intelligent substances generally.
- Why does Leibniz believe that concern for one’s own perfection results in concern for the perfection of others? Perhaps he assumes that one’s conception of one’s own perfection is non-egocentric from the beginning. My concern for myself, on this view, is concern for my perfection simply as the perfection of an intellectual substance; hence any other intellectual substance will appear to me to have the same claim on my concern. Alternatively, he may assume that my conception of my own perfection may be egocentric, but a proper understanding of this perfection requires me to engage in the activities that extend my concern to others. This is the strategy of Aristotle and Aquinas, who take friendship and intellectual love to mediate between self-concern and concern for others. They argue that an egocentric concern for my own perfection as a rational being leads to the co-operative activities that require non-instrumental concern for others. It is not clear whether Leibniz accepts this argument. 
- His account of the basis of concern for others in concern for their perfection affects his account of justice. While he accepts traditional ‘nominal definitions’ of justice, he argues that we fnid its real essence only by understanding it teleologically.¹⁸ A nominal definition might be negative, defniing just actions as those that are not open to reasonable complaint by others. But this defniition does not show us what would be a sound basis for reasonable complaint, or why a good person sees a reason for acting justly. To answer these further questions, we need to recognize the basis of justice in love for others and in concern for their perfection. Leibniz, therefore, describes justice as ‘the charity of the wise’.¹⁹ It is the expression of love for others, aiming at the proper end of such love, which is the perfection of intellectual substances. This is the right way to conceive justice, because it is the right way to understand the rational basis of concern for others. Since this basis rests on a true conception of self-interest, Carneades is wrong to believe in a confilct between justice and self-interest. 
- The connexion of justice with charity means that we cannot separate justice from beneficence. Justice does not consist simply in refraining from harm, and it does not leave other virtues to confer positive benefits on others. On the contrary, if the Golden Rule gives the content of justice, justice includes beneficence, since we would reasonably want others to be beneficent to us, and not simply to avoid harming us. Leibniz argues that we are not simply required to refrain from harm, but also to prevent harm to another if we can easily prevent it.²¹ Moreover, we are required not only to prevent harm, but even to beneft ianother, if we can easily do it. If we refuse to provide this benefit, the other person can reasonably complain.
- ‘We may say, then, that justice, at least among men, is the constant will to act as far as possible in such a way that no one can complain of us, if we would not complain of others in a similar situation. From this it is evident that when it is impossible to act so that the whole world is satisfied, we should try to satisfy people as much as possible. What is just thus conforms to the charity of the wise man.’
- In this reasoning about when a complaint would be reasonable, Leibniz relies on the Golden Rule as a guide to the requirements of justice. He answers the objection that the rule requires the judge not to sentence the criminal, since the judge would not want to be sentenced if she were in the criminal’s position.²³ Leibniz argues that we should not apply the Golden Rule simply by putting ourselves in one other person’s position, but by considering the results of being all the people affected by the action. A proper application of the Golden Rule requires the judge to sentence the criminal, and requires unequal distribution of profits in a partnership.²⁴ 
- The appeals to the Golden Rule and to possible complaints suggest two different questions that Leibniz might be asking: 
    - If you are a purely self-interested agent in each of the relevant positions, do you think the proposed action benefits or harms you? The frist question, by contrast, offers an independent test of justice. But the test that it offers seems to lead to unjust results. 
    - If you apply your sense of legitimate bases for complaint to each person’s position, what do you say? The interpretation of the Golden Rule suggested by the second question gives more plausible answers, since it does not lead to the violations of justice that seem to be allowed by the first question. But the second question does not provide an independent test of justice; for legitimate bases of complaint and resentment presuppose some views about justice, rather than explaining them by some independent principle. The function of the second question is to separate these views about justice from any possible distorting effects of our own interest and our own point of view.
- Leibniz often rejects a voluntarist account of the basis of moral principles, for theological, metaphysical, and moral reasons. Though he writes in ignorance of Cudworth’s Eternal and Immutable Morality, his statement of the issue and of the reasons for naturalism is close to Cudworth’s.²⁷ He formulates the issue in the Euthyphro, and, for Cudworth’s reasons, takes Socrates’ side.²⁸ Leibniz claims that Lutheran (‘our’) theologians all reject voluntarism, and most Roman and Reformed (Calvinist) theologians reject it, on both Scriptural and philosophical grounds.²⁹ If Leibniz is right, his report indicates that Lutheran theologians reject the voluntaristic elements in some of Luther’s remarks.³⁰ He rejects Pufendorf’s claim to be defending an orthodox Lutheran position. 
- If divine justice is simply the product of the divine will, God is not essentially just.³⁵ If we recognize that God is essentially just, and we do not simply mean to define ‘just’ as whatever God wills, we must recognize eternal truths about justice that are not products of the divine will. If Pufendorf denies these independent eternal truths in the case of justice, he ought also to maintain that God creates all the eternal truths, as Descartes did; he has no good reason to single out truths about goodness and justice (R 71–2). 








#                  Difficulties

- But he may not present the traditional eudaemonist view in its most plausible form. He connects naturalism and eudaemonism with some doctrines that are absent from Aquinas and Suarez, and that might reasonably arouse Kant’s suspicion. 
- - This conception of disinterested love allows Leibniz to endorse the pursuit of virtue for its own sake. He approves of most of Shaftesbury’s attitude to morality and the moral motive. In his view, non-mercenary love is possible insofar as the happiness of those in whose happiness we take pleasure becomes a part of our own happiness. If we fnid pleasure ‘in’ the good of another, the happiness of others turns into our own happiness.¹¹ This position shares some of the obscurities of Shaftesbury’s position. It is not clear whether Leibniz’s claims about happiness rest on hedonist assumptions or not. Indeed, he seems to raise some difficulties for a strictly hedonist account of happiness. If happiness consists entirely in pleasure, we can find pleasure ‘in’ some object only insofar as the object is a source of pleasure, but not something valued for its own sake. In this sense, an Epicurean hedonist can find pleasure ‘in’ the pleasure of another.¹² But this construal of ‘pleasure in’ does not explain how the happiness of others could ‘turn into’ our own happiness. However important your pleasure may be in causing my pleasure, this causal role does not make it either the whole or a part of my pleasure. Alternatively, if I take pleasure in something as the essential object of this pleasure, the object is not simply causally related to the pleasure, but internally connected to the value of the pleasure itself. If this is what Leibniz means, he cannot consistently identify good exclusively with pleasure; for I identify my good with pleasure in this specific object, on the assumption that this object is intrinsically appropriate, and hence valuable in its own right. 
- If disinterested love (as Leibniz understands it) promotes one’s own good, the disinterested pursuit of virtue should promote one’s own good. This is nonetheless true even if virtue does not yield greater pleasure than any other way of life, according to some neutral measure of quantity of pleasure. Shaftesbury’s case seems to rely on arguments and assumptions that Leibniz endorses; and so Leibniz does not explain why Shaftesbury is wrong. 
- Leibniz need not withdraw his claim that divine rewards and punishments are important. Even if they are not necessary to make virtue promote one’s happiness, they may provide signifciant further reasons for believing this claim, and especially for believing that virtue does not require a long-term sacrifice of happiness. Shaftesbury agrees on these points. But it does not follow that divine rewards and punishments are needed to demonstrate that virtue promotes happiness.
- This comparison of Leibniz’s claims about disinterested love with his objections to Shaftesbury suggests that he has not explored the implications of his various views on pleasure and happiness. His opposition to Shaftesbury seems to refelct a hedonist and subjectivist conception that does not account for all of Leibniz’s claims and arguments about happiness. His arguments seem to bring him closer to the Aristotelian position on
- The questions that arise about Leibniz’s test for justice also raise doubts about whether justice can be identified with the charity of the wise, as he understands it. If charity is to be understood as generalized concern with human interests, it does not seem to be the same as justice. For charity, so understood, seems to lead to a utilitarian conclusion, through the first interpretation of the Golden Rule. Justice, however, seems to stop short of this utilitarian conclusion. Leibniz is right to say that justice is not confined to refraining from harm, and so cannot be distinguished from charity on that basis, but he is wrong to infer (if he means to infer this) that justice is simply generalized benevolence.  this question than his objections to Shaftesbury might would suggest. This objection does not show that justice is not the charity of the wise; for it may be unfair to Leibniz to identify charity with generalized benevolence, understood as a strictly utilitarian outlook. One might reply that love of other people includes concern for their rights and obligations as individual persons, and so it should make us responsive to complaints founded on convictions about fairness. In describing God’s outlook as impartial love for persons, we do not imply that God is indifferent to justice, or that God is ready to impose extreme harm on some simply to benefit others. Similarly, if justice is the charity of the wise, and charity is not concern for maximum total welfare, justice is not utilitarian concern either. But if considerations of fairness and justice regulate charity, an understanding of charity is not entirely prior to an understanding of justice. Hence the account of justice as the charity of the wise may be circular. 
- Voluntarism, according to Leibniz, makes justice ‘arbitrary’, whereas the opposed view makes it part of the nature of things, and no more dependent on will than arithmetic is (R 49 = L 563). In the light of views such as Cumberland’s and Pufendorf’s, more needs to be said to show that these two views exhaust the possibilities. A moderate voluntarist argues that God has reasons for preferring one law over another, and that these reasons rest on facts about human beings, but still they are not moral principles until they are affrimed by God’s will. Leibniz’s discussion suffers from his failure to consider this argument to show that not all voluntarist views make justice arbitrary. 
- Pufendorf claims to avoid a Hobbesian conception of the state of nature by arguing that moral requirements are not, as Hobbes supposes, obligations imposed by a state, but obligations imposed by God. The state of nature is a state in which we have no superior, but, since God always commands obedience to the moral law, we are never in a state of nature. We may pass over questions about whether Pufendorf and Leibniz give a fair account of Hobbes’s position. Even if Pufendorf improves on Hobbes on this point, Leibniz still believes that Pufendorf’s voluntarism is open to objection. 
- His first objection mentions Grotius’ ‘etiamsi’ clause, but does not explain the point clearly.³⁴ As he describes Grotius’ view, even without reference to God care for one’s own well-being would create a natural obligation. But he does not explain what he takes Grotius to mean by ‘well-being’. We might take him to suppose, as Barbeyrac does, that Grotius recognizes only prudential, not moral, reasons, in abstraction from God. If this is what Leibniz means, he plays directly into the hands of Pufendorf and Barbeyrac. Alternatively, we might intend ‘well-being’ in the broader sense intended by Grotius, so that it does not embrace simply the pleasant and the advantageous, but also includes the morally good. In that case, his appeal to Grotius implies opposition to voluntarism. But he does not defend it fully enough to give any argument against the voluntarist position.
- According to Leibniz, Pufendorf’s claims about the necessary connexion between morality and legislation betray a misunderstanding of the status of morality. Virtuous people do not need to regard their action as required by any act of legislation.³⁶ Leibniz seems to be unfair to Pufendorf here, by running together different claims: (1) If something is morally right, it must be required by an act of legislation. (2) If we are morally virtuous, we must regard morally right actions as required by an act of legislation. (3) If we are morally virtuous, we must perform morally right actions out of fear of the legislator. The criticisms of Pufendorf attack the third claim, but Leibniz does not show that Pufendorf is committed to it; it does not follow from either of the first two claims. But Leibniz’s objection suggests a fair question. If Pufendorf does not accept the third claim, why is an act of legislation needed? We might grant, and we might concede that Leibniz has overlooked, some element of compulsoriness in morality. When Leibniz says that a virtuous person does the right actions out of love for God or his neighbour, he does not seem to give an adequate account of the virtuous person. I might do many things out of love of actions or people without regarding them as required by morality. In taking them to be part of morality, I recognize that they do not depend on my preference; I am required to form my preference by these demands. In that respect—we might say on Pufendorf’s behalf—I ought to look on them as a matter of law rather than choice or liking. But to agree with Pufendorf on this point is not to agree that we must look on right actions as products of legislation. To recognize an action as required and non-optional, I need not believe that anyone has legislated it. To agree with Pufendorf we would have to overlook Suarez’s distinction between the due (debitum) and the obligatory (in his narrow sense). We could correct Leibniz’s neglect of the compulsory element in morality, and the recognition of compulsoriness in the moral consciousness, without accepting Pufendorf’s claim that the compulsoriness of morality must arise from legislation. 
- Leibniz alludes to this issue; he argues that Pufendorf’s views on necessity overlook the fact that moral situations themselves can present us with practical necessities without reference to any law.³⁸ But despite this plausible objection to a purely legal conception of moral necessity, Leibniz concedes Pufendorf’s restriction of duty to what is prescribed by law (R 73). It is not clear what this concession means, however. Does Leibniz also agree with Pufendorf’s claim that law requires an act of legislation by a superior? If he agrees on this point, he seems to give up a basic point to Pufendorf. 
- Sometimes, however, Leibniz’s principle of perfection seems rather similar to one of Clarke’s principles of fitness—as though it were intended as a principle that we can just see to be correct, without reference to our nature as rational agents. 