- Mistakely thinks that Aristotle thought that only virtue of character is a real virtue
- Only virtue of character is a real virtue
- The Naturalism is true. But human function consists not in being guided by practical reason
- Sentimentalism is true: the extent to which we are capable of sympathy defines the extent of concern.
- Extreme Will-Intellect-Passion Sentimentalism (thought can't motivate without desire) is true. In his view, reason moves us only in so far as it presents means to some independently-desired end; the fact that we desire a certain sort of object explains why other objects are worth choosing.
- Thought that Aristotle's and the Scholastics' rejection of an Extreme Will-Desire Intellectualism supports his (Hutcheson's) Extreme Will-Intellect-Passion Sentimentalism, because the only reasons are the internal ones
- The anti-rationalist position of Hutcheson claims that the different specific ends people pursue ref l ect their different desires, inclinations, and attitudes, and must ultimately be explained by these, rather than by their different rational beliefs about anything.
- Critiques Hobbes from sentimentalist point of view. According to sentimentalist critics, he has appealed to the wrong non-normative facts, because he is wrong about the motives that actually influence us. Hutcheson treats normative facts as facts about the reactions of our moral sense. 
- he denies a connexion between reason and morality
- defends independent morality by appealing to a moral sense. 
- He is naturalist about the relation of the divine will to morality, but he is sentimentalist about our knowledge of moral properties
- Hutcheson is a utilitarian, and tries to show that a moral sense theory is committed to utilitarianism. He agrees with Whewell in connecting a meta-ethical with a normative thesis, but the connexion is the opposite of the one that Whewell asserts. Whewell believes that a moral sense theory is an expression of belief in metaphysically independent morality that includes non-consequentialist morality; Hutcheson, however, believes that a moral sense theory supports utilitarian morality. He argues that it is permissible to harm some people in order to increase the happiness of others, and thereby to increase the total happiness.
- oppose theological voluntarism. 
- Later believers in a moral sense, Hume and Hutcheson, reject moral realism
- Some later critics treat Shaftesbury as the first sentimentalist. Hutcheson is the first of these critics; he designs his Inquiry as a defence of Shaftesbury’s principles.¹ The principles he defends are disinterested affection and a moral sense—two prominent themes in Shaftesbury’s defence of the moral outlook. 
- These claims about a moral sense allow objective moral properties. If we are immediately aware of them, they may still be aspects of ftiness to rational nature, as Suarez supposes. Shaftesbury’s suggestion that we have a natural sense of the honestum might indicate that he agrees with Suarez’s conception of the nature of moral properties. Belief in a moral sense conflicts with realism, however, if we hold a Lockean conception of a sense and its objects. According to Locke, or one common interpretation of Locke, senses whose objects are secondary qualities do not tell us about objective features of the world, but only about our own ideas. If Shaftesbury accepts a Lockean conception, his belief in a moral sense commits him to claims about moral knowledge that conflict with metaphysical realism about moral properties. But belief in a moral sense does not by itself require Lockean epistemological claims. As Reid points out later, belief in a moral sense does not push us towards realism or anti-realism until we decide how we are to conceive the relevant sort of sense.⁵³ Hutcheson makes up his mind on this question, by accepting a Lockean conception of a sense, and therefore rejecting realism about moral properties.⁵⁴
- In contrast to Fiddes, Hutcheson develops the psychological side of Shaftesbury’s argument. He believes he defends Shaftesbury’s realism by insisting on the irreducibility of moral properties and sentiments to Hobbesian self-interest. He relies on Shaftesbury’s defence of the moral sense against Hobbesian egoism, and formulates his account of the metaphysics and epistemology of morality on the basis of a Lockean account of the moral sense. This account requires the rejection of the metaphysical independence of moral properties from beliefs, sentiments, and legislation, and so abandons one aspect of Shaftesbury’s realism. 
- Hutcheson believes, as Cumberland and Shaftesbury do,¹ that Hobbes’s position undermines morality.² He agrees with Shaftesbury and Clarke in rejecting Cumberland’s and Locke’s view that morality consists in laws imposed by divine commands.³ In his view, we can understand moral obligation without reference to any law, by understanding our approval of benevolence. This approval is disinterested; Hutcheson rejects attempts to defend morality within the limits of a hedonist psychology. But he also rejects Clarke’s account of moral judgment and motivation as aspects of rational understanding grasping the fitness of things and properties. He reaches his own position by refelxion on his objections to Clarke.⁴ Hence he rejects the extreme rationalism of Clarke by insisting on a role for both reason and desire in moral motivation and justification. 
- In the Inquiry, therefore, Hutcheson supports Shaftesbury rather than Clarke. He undertakes to defend the principles of Shaftesbury against Mandeville, and to present the ideas of moral good and evil according to the views of ancient moralists.⁵
- Hutcheson defends Shaftesbury by rejecting all attempts to reduce moral judgments to calculations of self-interest. Against reductive views that treat moral judgment as the result of instrumental reasoning, he argues that some moral judgments are immediate judgments of a moral sense. This argument defends Shaftesbury’s ‘moral realism’ (though Hutcheson does not use Shaftesbury’s phrase). Shaftesbury follows traditional naturalists in claiming that the morally right (the honestum) is really distinct from the pleasant (dulce) and the advantageous (commodum, utile). Hutcheson is also a realist on this point. 
- The Inquiry also describes the content of our moral judgments. Hutcheson takes the basis of moral judgment to be utilitarian. His utilitarianism helps his anti-reductionism. For it is especially clear that utilitarian principles cannot be reduced to self-interested principles. If we are ultimately, and not just instrumentally, committed to utilitarian principles, our commitment is fundamentally disinterested. This utilitarian side of Hutcheson’s position goes beyond Shaftesbury and Cumberland, but Hutcheson might reasonably claim that it offers a further defence of their position. 
- In his late System of Moral Philosophy, he accepts or adapts several of Butler’s claims about conscience and moral judgment.⁸ Several of his arguments against the reductive aspects of Hobbes’s moral psychology are similar to Butler’s.
- Whewell’s view of Hutcheson as a philosopher of independent morality is open to question, however, insofar as Hutcheson is a utilitarian, and so makes morality ‘dependent’ on universal pleasure. Whewell takes opposition to utilitarianism to be one mark of independent morality, but he does not discuss Hutcheson’s elaborate statement of utilitarianism. He is right to connect Hutcheson’s defence of immediate and disinterested moral judgment with independent morality, though he argues that the introduction of a moral sense tends to compromise a defence of independent morality. Before
- Hutcheson follows Shaftesbury in rejecting Hobbes’s psychological hedonism. He denies that the desire for one’s own pleasure is the only ultimate non-rational desire, and so he rejects Hobbes’s view that both exciting and justifying reasons are ultimately derived from the desire for one’s own pleasure. But he believes Shaftesbury does not go far enough. He argues that Shaftesbury’s attempt to allow unselfish virtue within hedonist assumptions is not a defensible view of the relation between morality, desire, and pleasure.¹⁰ To derive our unselfsih motives from our desire for pleasure, we have to refelct on the remote and indirect consequences of our actions and motives. Such a refelxion, aided by the arguments of Cumberland and Pufendorf, might vindicate the cultivation of benevolence, but Hutcheson believes it is a wildly implausible explanation of our actual benevolent outlook. We do not need to be convinced by the conclusion of any complex prudential reasoning in order to feel and to approve benevolent motives.¹¹ 
- The next line of defence for psychological hedonism claims that moral goodness appeals to us not because its remoter consequences appear pleasant, but because it appears pleasant in its own right, apart from its consequences. Hutcheson answers that this hedonist argument is self-defeating, because our pleasure in virtuous action needs to be explained by an antecedent concern for virtuous action.¹² Pain in the absence of a desired object and pleasure in our success in getting it are the by-products of our desire for the object itself; they are not the objects of the desire.¹³ Though moral sentiments often cause pain and uneasiness, this feature of them does not support hedonism; for we would not be uneasy unless we objected, on some non-hedonist ground, to the situation that makes us uneasy. That is why we respond to our uneasiness by trying to get rid of the situation we object to, not by trying to remove our uneasiness at it. We do not, for instance, try to remove our uneasiness at someone’s distress by trying to care less about it; instead, we try to remove their distress.¹⁴ Our moral sentiments include pleasure and pain in certain situations, but they do not aim primarily at pleasure and the absence of pain.¹⁵ 
- In opposing indirect hedonism and egoism, Hutcheson also attacks Shaftesbury’s other opponents, the theological moralists who try to explain moral motivation by appeal to the desire for rewards and punishments. He argues that such motives cannot explain our admiration for morally good action. If we believed that virtuous people act entirely from the desire for further rewards after death, we would admire them no more than we admire people who do the right actions only for the sake of more immediate rewards.¹⁸ 
- Following Shaftesbury, he allows mixed motives, if the moral motive is sufficient for morally right action and the desire for reward is simply a further incentive.¹⁹ Still, simple desire for rewards cannot constitute a morally admirable motive by itself; our admiration presupposes some disinterested motive.²¹ 
- Hutcheson believes that psychological hedonism is false, because it gives a false account of other-regarding action. But, in contrast to Shaftesbury, he also rejects the traditional eudaemonist view that one’s happiness may include actions and states of character. He accepts prudential hedonism—the identification of one’s own good and one’s own happiness with pleasure.²² For a prudential hedonist, self-interested reasoning is about ways of maximizing pleasure; any aims that do not aim at maximizing my pleasure do not aim at my happiness or my good. 
- Since the Inquiry considers only egoism as a viable alternative, Hutcheson tends to speak as though we must believe in a moral sense if we are to allow disinterested action. This is how he presents the issue in his early essay on Mandeville. According to Mandeville, all apparently virtuous action is really self-interested, resulting from the desire for one’s own pleasure or for some means to it.³³ Hutcheson answers by defending ‘kind affections’ and a moral sense, without distinction.³⁴ We might suppose, therefore, that belief in a moral sense commits us only to recognition of disinterested action. But Hutcheson intends more than this; he also means to assimilate moral judgments to the senses rather than reason. 
- He connects the immediacy of moral judgments with their passivity. We seem to receive them from external reality just as we receive ideas of sensory qualities.³⁵We
- According to Hobbes, morality accords with human nature only in the specific circumstances of the commonwealth. Hutcheson argues that even when circumstances do not make morality beneficial for us (conceiving our benefit in a self-confined sense), morality is still in accord with human nature. Hutcheson answers Hobbesby appealing to our actual desires and motives, and specifcially to sympathy and benevolence, to show that, apart from our selfsih advantage, we still have a motive that is strong enough to move us to act morally. He accepts Hobbes’s view about what makes something natural; for he argues that we often have a predominant desire to do what is morally right, even apart from any further benefti we gain from it. 
- Since morality has this natural basis, theological voluntarists are wrong to identify moral rightness with conformity to the divine will or divine legislation.⁴⁰ God’s arbitrary will and inclination does not make it right to do what promotes the good of humanity. Voluntarism gives a false account of moral knowledge and motivation. In order to know what is morally right, we ought not to ask simply what God requires; nor ought we to act simply out of a desire to conform to divine commands. We should rely on our moral sense, and on unselfish motivation. 
- Since voluntarism is mistaken, we should also recognize a natural law antecedent to any positive legislation by God or by human legislators. The first principles of natural law are eternal and immutable, and natural law imposes obligations even in the state of nature.⁴¹ Nor are they the result of the arbitrary choice of God and the exercise of divine power. God does not create goodness by arbitrary will; God is necessarily good, and therefore benevolent. Hence God approves of some actions rather than others because they benefit humanity.⁴² God’s goodness ultimately explains our having our moral sense; for since it is good for humanity that we are benevolent and approve benevolence, God, being benevolent, gives us a moral sense that approves of benevolent action.⁴³ Hutcheson combines Shaftesbury’s opposition to voluntarism with his own views about the moral sense and benevolence. 
- Hutcheson emphasizes benevolence among God’s attributes, and infers that we have to attribute something like the moral sense to God: ‘ . . . if we can in any way reason concerning the original nature from what we feel in our own, or from any of our notions of excellency or perfection, we must conceive in a Deity some perceptive power analogous to our moral sense, by which he may have self-approbation in certain affections and actions . . .
- Hutcheson begins his argument by defending a more moderate position than Hobbesian anti-rationalism. At first he only rejects the extreme intellectualism that makes reasonable action proceed from reason entirely without desire.⁴⁶ So far he agrees with Locke. Locke, however, assumes that extreme intellectualism is the ‘received opinion’, perhaps because he does not distinguish intellectualism from rationalism (which one might indeed take to be a received Scholastic opinion).⁴⁷ Hutcheson disagrees with him on this historical point. He claims to support the Scholastic opposition to extreme intellectualism. 
- He claims that desire as well as reason is necessary for action, and that desire is needed for us to aim at an end. In claiming that the ends of action cannot be derived from reason without desire, he believes he follows Aristotle.⁴⁹ According to Aristotle, thought by itself moves nothing; the thought that initiates motion must be ‘thought for the sake of some end’ (EN 1139a35–6), which requires desire. Similarly, Aquinas asserts that our cognitive capacity does not move us without desire as intermediary.⁵⁰ According to Hutcheson, those who claim that virtue belongs wholly to reason ignore the Scholastic division. The extreme intellectualist claim about virtue is inconsistent with eudaemonism, which assumes an original desire, not derived from reason, for happiness as ultimate end.⁵¹ In speaking of ‘confused harangues’ Hutcheson may refer to Clarke and others who believe that the mere awareness of eternal fitnesses moves us to the appropriate action.
Clarke’s theory of action, no less than his epistemology and his meta-ethics, departs from the Scholastic position, in order to achieve immediacy and certainty. If Hutcheson reasserts the Scholastic view, he does not hold Hobbesian anti-rationalism. The Scholastics distinguish rational will from non-rational passion, but Hobbes rejects that distinction. 
- Hutcheson agrees with their account for hedonist reasons; he treats it as an account of the source of pleasure and contentment. But he does not agree with Locke and Hobbes in replacing the Aristotelian conceptionofanultimategoodwithapsychologicalhedonistviewthatderivesallmotivation from the desire for one’s own pleasure. In his view, motivation must be traced back either to self-love, aiming at our private happiness, or to a special sense or instinct that leads us, as agents and as critics, to take a special interest in benevolence. 
- Since Hutcheson assumes that the ultimate end is the object of a non-rational instinct prior to all practical reason, he rejects the traditional conception of happiness as the ultimate object of rational desire. If the desire for happiness is not a distinctively rational desire, happiness cannot be, as Aristotelian eudaemonists suppose, a composite of objects of rational desire. Hutcheson agrees with Locke and Hobbes in substituting a hedonist conception of happiness for the traditional conception. 
- According to Hobbes, deliberation proceeds by anticipation of different degrees of pleasure arousing desires of different strengths, until we reach the last appetite, which moves us to the action. Hutcheson does not treat deliberation as mere anticipation. He marks different roles for reasons and deliberation by distinguishing exciting reasons from justifying reasons (distinction seems quite close to Raz’s distinction between ‘guiding’ (= justifying) and ‘explanatory’ (= exciting) reasons). Though these are distinct types of reasons, it is not an accident that they are both called ‘reasons’. A motivating and explanatory reason appears to justify us to some degree, and a normative reason is capable in some circumstances of motivating us. Still, a motivating reason may not justify us adequately, and an adequate justifciation may not move us to act: 
    - p is an exciting reason for S to do x if and only if p is a truth showing a quality in x exciting S to do x. This division might suggest that exciting reasons are those that move me to action, and hence explain my action, and justifying reasons are those that justify it.⁵⁶  Sometimes we ask ‘What is [or was] your reason for doing that?’. We seek an explanation of your action that identifeis what motivated or excited you to act. The correct answer is the one that describes what actually moved you.
    - p is a justifying reason for S to do x if and only if p is a truth showing a quality in x engaging our approbation.⁵⁵ If we ask ‘Why should I do that?’ or ‘What reason is there to do that?’ we do not seek a report on anyone’s actual motive; we seek a justification that could be offered, to provide (let us say) a normative reason. Hutcheson, however, does not accept this account of rational desire, because he does not recognize normative reasons. As he understands justifying reasons, they exist only if I actually approve of something; hence, if I have justifying reasons for benefiting others without regard to myself, I have a moral sense.⁶⁰ A search for justifying reasons, as Hutcheson conceives them, is not a search for normative reasons. In looking for normative reasons for an action, we examine the pros and cons of the action itself. But in looking for Hutcheson’s justifying reasons, we examine our sentiments to see whether the proposed action arouses a feeling of approval. Since justifying reasons require actual feelings of approval, they move us to action by themselves, so that we sometimes act without exciting reasons.⁶¹ 
- In saying that a sense involves reception of an idea he does not mean that every idea we receive corresponds to some genuine feature of the object itself. ‘Perceptions’ that are ‘proper ideas of sensation’ do not present any external reality; for, though they are signs of some external reality, the reality need not resemble them.⁷¹ Since objects themselves are not (for instance) coloured, our ideas of secondary qualities do not present actual qualities of the objects; secondary qualities are ideas caused by objects, not qualities in objects themselves. Similarly, the moral sense is aware of the moral goodness of an action, which is not a feature of the action itself. Hutcheson distinguishes three aspects of a benevolent action: (1) the agent’s action; (2) the beneficiary’s reaction to the agent’s action; (3) the spectator’s reaction to the agent’s action and to the beneficiary’s reaction. The third aspect—the spectator’s reaction to the agent and to the beneficiary—involves a feeling of approbation, and this reaction makes it appropriate to speak of a moral sense.⁷² The feeling of approval corresponds to the idea of colour in the case of sight. A moral judgment, therefore, is similar to a sensory judgment because it refers both to the external world and to the state of the person making the judgment. The colours we attribute to external objects are ‘only perceptions in our minds, and not images of any like external quality’ (IMS 163).⁷³ In seeing that bodies are red, we see external bodies; but all we are aware of is their effect on us. Since Hutcheson takes this view of the nature of secondary qualities, he takes his comparison of moral judgment to a sense to imply that moral judgments do not reveal objective moral properties of external objects. 
- Hutcheson agrees that a moral judgment involves some belief about an objective property of some external object—the benevolence of the agent. Ought he not, then, to say that this benevolence itself is the moral goodness that we recognize through the moral sense? It is not implausible (even if it is over-simplified) to claim that morally good agents are good insofar as they are benevolent, and that the goodness we ascribe to them is benevolence. It seems far more implausible to claim that the goodness we ascribe to agents is an idea in our minds; this does not seem to be what we praise them for when we praise their benevolence as the whole or a part of their moral goodness. Hutcheson rejects the objectivist answer for a good reason, given the rest of his position. For if benevolence were moral goodness, we could judge that an action is morally good, by judging that it is benevolent, and still be indifferent to it. In that case, the moral goodness would not include any obligation, as Hutcheson understands obligation. Since moral goodness includes obligation, and obligation is psychological necessity, moral goodness includes some psychological necessity. The moral judge who ascribes goodness to the agent recognizes an obligation, and hence a motive. Since obligation and motive belong to the judge, the moral goodness that we ascribe to the action must really be a feature of the judge rather than of the action itself. 
- Hutcheson, therefore, is a subjectivist because he is an internalist about moral judgment and motivation. He is an internalist because he takes moral goodness to include obligation, takes obligations to include reasons, and reduces reasons to motives. Hence his antirationalism about reason and desire supports his subjectivism about moral properties. He does not thoughtlessly import a Lockean conception of sensory qualities into a position that might support realism about moral properties. He needs a subjectivist account of moral properties to maintain his anti-rationalism and its consequences. His interpretation of necessity, obligation, and reasons underlies his discussion of justifying reasons. Justifying reasons must be features of actual desires; hence, if morality provides justifying reasons, moral properties must belong to our desires and feelings, not to the external reality that we react to. 
- The anti-rationalist theory of motivation underlies different aspects of Hutcheson’s position that might seem initially separable. In his criticism of Clarke, he rejects (1) Clarke’s rationalism about motivation, (2) his rationalism about moral judgment, and (3) his realism about moral properties. We might think that if we agreed with Hutcheson on the first point, we could still agree with Clarke on the other two points, and that if we agreed with Hutcheson about ascribing moral judgment to a moral sense, we could still be realists about moral properties. In the Inquiry it is not clear why Hutcheson prefers his belief in a moral sense to Clarke’s rationalism. The Illustrations, however, clarifies Hutcheson’s version of anti-rationalism about reasons. If we believe - as Clarke believes - that recognition of moral properties includes recognition of obligation, we must also, given Hutcheson’s view of obligation and reasons, attribute moral judgments to a moral sense, and accept a subjectivist account of moral properties. 
- Morality is real because we have distinct and irreducible sentiments that favour morality, and we do not construct them out of self-love. On this point, Hutcheson concludes that Shaftesbury is right and Hobbes is wrong. But acceptance of this degree of realism about morality does not induce Hutcheson to accept the independent reality of moral properties; he takes their existence to require the appropriate reaction in a spectator or judge. He believes this because he believes Hobbes’s reduction of obligation to motivation and he believes that something’s having a moral property imposes an obligation. He therefore denies that moral goodness and badness are independent of human sentiments and reactions, just as Hobbes denies that they are independent of commands.⁷⁵ 
- He argues that moral principles are impartial: they are not concerned differentially with the good of some people rather than others, but with the good of all those affected. He takes a teleological view of morality, as both Cumberland and Shaftesbury do. Following Cumberland, but not Shaftesbury, he holds an instrumental version of a teleological view; moral rules and principles are to be observed not for their own sake, but for their causal consequences. He goes beyond both Shaftesbury and Cumberland in holding a maximizing conception of the end to be achieved: the end is the maximum total quantity of good, however it is distributed. By these steps Hutcheson transforms Shaftesbury’s and Cumberland’s views into a utilitarian outlook. 
- Cumberland begins his treatise by quoting the second ‘great commandment’ and St Paul’s claim that love is the fulfilling of the law.¹ To love one’s neighbour as oneself seems to imply an impartial concern with the interests of different people without discrimination; and this impartial concern seems especially characteristic of benevolence. Hence Cumberland makes benevolence the universal virtue, controlling the others. Hutcheson agrees with him. Moreover,benevolenceseemstofitHutcheson’sbeliefinthemoralsense.Forbenevolence results from sympathetic pleasure and pain provoked by the pleasures and pains of others, without reference to any further advantage to the agent. Hence it seems to appeal to the moral sense. Hutcheson understands different moral rules as particular expressions of benevolence. 
- But though benevolence appears to be the right sentiment to support utilitarianism, this appearance may be misleading. For the extent and direction of the benevolence that people actually feel does not seem to extend to utilitarian morality. Even though benevolence is not inherently restricted in the way that, say, parental love or friendship or loyalty to a group is, we may still feel it for some people and not for others; it need not be impartially directed towards the benefti of everyone affected by our actions. Hutcheson recognizes this difficulty, since he distinguishes different attitudes that might be identifeid with benevolence. Some of these are discriminatory, directed to some particular people to the exclusion of others, rather than to other people generally. But, in his view, we approve most strongly of the benevolence that seeks to maximize utility.²
- Utilitarian morality aims at maximum total good, summed over all the people concerned, irrespective of its distribution. To show that our moral sense approves of this outlook, we may point out that if A gave a large gift to charity that A could easily afford, we would approve of A’s action more than we would approve of B’s action, if B were in similar circumstances to A, but gave a small gift to charity, and wasted the rest of the money that could have been given to charity. Such cases show that we approve of greater rather than lesser benefcience. Hence, Hutcheson argues, they show that the moral sense approves of the maximizing aspect of utilitarianism. 
- We might think Hutcheson faces a difficulty in the fact that our moral sense also approves of narrower attachments and of benefcience directed to one’s family, or friends, or associates, without reference to broader utilitarian considerations. He answers this apparent difficulty by arguing that utilitarian reasons can be given for our approval of both narrower and wider attachments to the good of others. Agents are more virtuous if they prefer to benefit ‘unrelated’ people rather than (say) to return beneftis to people who have beneftied them.⁷ But causing harm to ‘related’ people is worse than causing it to unrelated ones, because someone who cannot even treat friends decently is less likely to develop the expanded benevolence that is characteristic of morality.⁸ the attitudes we praise more are those likely to produce more good on the whole. Hence the degrees of our approval match the tendency of different traits of character to promote the public good.⁹ 
- While Hutcheson insists on the supremacy of the affection towards the universal happiness, he recognizes some mitigation, though not justification, of departures from it. We allow mitigation in cases where some generally admirable trait causes deviation from utility in a particular case.¹⁴ Our attitude is understandable, since we usually do not think about how to promote the general happiness, but we take it for granted that particular benevolent actions promote it.¹⁵ Some of our narrower affections, both loves and hates, are natural and acceptable on this utilitarian presumption. 
- He agrees with Shaftesbury’s defence of naturalism, and affirms that the proper foundation of right is God’s infinite goodness and wisdom. The moral requirement to obey God rests on the recognition of God’s goodness, and not simply on gratitude for the benefits God has given us.¹⁶ Gratitude alone does not justify obedience to God; the fact that a gangster has done me a good turn does not justify me in doing whatever he asks me to, and, similarly, gratitude warrants obedience only if we have reasonable independent assurance of God’s goodness.  This comment on gratitude answers Pufendorf’s attempted defence of voluntarism. Pufendorf rejects Hobbes’s apparent view that our only reason for obeying God’s commands is fear of punishment; the alternative he offers is gratitude for God’s benefits. Hutcheson replies, quite reasonably, that, unless we know more about the divine will, gratitude is no better than Hobbesian fear as a basis for genuine morality. Justifeid obedience to God rests on recognition of God’s goodness, and hence on the approval by our moral sense of God’s moral sense. Since our moral sense is utilitarian, God is a utilitarian, guided by the requirements of universal maximizing benevolence.¹⁷ 
- Since what is suitable for human nature is whatever maximizes utility, the laws of nature are rules for the maximization of utility.¹⁸
- The utilitarian explanation of the laws of nature, and the rejection of voluntarism, support Hutcheson’s answer to those critics who claim that we have moral reasons for accepting some specific moral rules without exceptions. He rejects the argument of ‘some divines’, and in particular Berkeley, for strict observance of moral rules because of our ignorance of utility.²¹ Hutcheson argues that if we refrain from utilitarian reasoning to find exceptions to the common laws of nature, we must also forgo the reasoning that allows us to find these ‘ordinary rules or laws of nature’ in the frist place.²² 
- One might take Hutcheson to offer a direct utilitarian reply to Berkeley’s argument. Berkeley argues for an indirect utilitarian attitude to the rule of obedience to the established government; Hutcheson seems to answer that this indirect argument rests on an unreasonably pessimistic assumption about our ignorance of consequences. But Hutcheson accepts some indirect utilitarian arguments; they support his claims about rights, and they offer useful utilitarian answers to apparent counter-examples. 
- He relies on two claims that need to be distinguished:
    - Universal calm benevolence is free of any exclusive or discriminatory attitude that is irrelevant from the moral point of view to the distribution of good. - We may agree, for instance, that a doctor ought to be impartial between different patients with the same needs, and ought not to prefer the richest, or most intelligent, or those most like herself.
    - Universal calm benevolence is free of any non-maximizing discriminatory attitude to the distribution of good. But we may not agree that she ought to take a maximizing point of view in deciding how to treat different patients with the same needs (for instance, by cutting up the less socially useful people for spare-part surgery on the more useful people). Since it is not clear that impartial benevolence supports the maximizing utilitarian outlook, Hutcheson’s argument is incomplete. Approval of utilitarian benevolence, therefore, does not result in approval of the traits and outlooks that we actually approve of. If we try to cultivate the optimific traits and outlooks (those that have the best prospect of maximizing utility), perhaps we should cultivate some traitsthat makeuslessconcernedwith ourobligationsto ‘related’ people, so that wegraspthe maximizingconsiderations.Inthatcase,ourbeliefsaboutwhatmaximizesutilitymaydiverge from our beliefs about particular attachments. Hutcheson should allow this possibility, since he does not show that the particular traits we approve of are those that maximize utility. If our tendencies to approve diverge from utilitarian benevolence, he believes our approval needs to be modifeid. But it is not clear that our moral sense approves utilitarian modifications. 
- He does not confront the objection, urged by Maxwell and by Butler, that it is possible to pursue the public good by morally impermissible means, and so he does not allow that some moral questions are distinct from questions about how to promote the public good. He implicitly answers this objection, however, by arguing that one can explain apparently non-utilitarian judgments on indirect utilitarian grounds. The fact that our moral sense approves of non-utilitarian attitudes is consistent with a utilitarian account of our moral sense, if we promote utility by acting on non-utilitarian attitudes. Our non-utilitarian motives strengthen our attachment to the courses of action that promote utility.²⁵ The cardinal virtue of justice, as recognized by the ancients, often appears to conflict with utility. But we can see, on closer examination, that its utilitarian basis explains its primacy among the virtues.²⁶ 
- Hutcheson defends indirect utilitarianism more explicitly, but, on the other hand, he rejects indirect egoism, claiming that we approve things unselfishly without reference to consequences for our own advantage. 
- How should we understand the claim that benevolence is what the moral sense approves of? We might take it in two ways: 
    - From our beliefs about morality we might conclude that the basic moral principle is benevolence. Then we might notice that we have the sort of sensory awareness and approval of benevolence that suggests we have a moral sense; if this were not what it approved, it would not be a strictly moral sense. These two accounts of the relation between benevolence and the moral sense imply different views about the resolution of possible conflicts. According to this view, our argument about the character of morality shows that the moral point of view is benevolent before we consider whether we have a moral sense or not. Approval of benevolence is a necessary condition for being a moral sense, and we know a priori that the moral sense approves of benevolence. If, then, we are inclined to make moral claims that conflict with those of utilitarian benevolence, we can legitimately reject them on the ground that they do not accurately refelct our moral sense, which approves of benevolence.
    - We might defnie a moral sense as the sensory awareness and approval we feel towards the actions and characters of human agents, considered from a disinterested point of view. Having shown that we have such a sense, we then ask what it approves of and we fnid that it approves of benevolence. If we accept the second view of benevolence and the moral sense, we cannot deal with conflicts in as in 1st claim way. Our belief that the moral sense approves of benevolence is simply empirical, and liable to be falsifeid by further evidence of what the moral sense (defnied independently of approval of benevolence) approves of. In the Illustrations Hutcheson takes this second view, assuming a purely empirical connexion between benevolence and the moral sense. Moral properties are taken to imply obligation, and hence to imply motivation. The properties approved of by the moral sense are simply those that in fact give us justifying reasons; and these have to be states of the agent, according to Hutcheson’s subjectivism. According to this view, benevolence is not moral goodness; it is the property that is shown by empirical evidence to arouse our feeling of approval, on which moral goodness depends. 
- Hutcheson follows Hobbes in accepting a simple compatibilist account of freedom, claiming that we act freely if we are determined by our own desires. Simple compatibilism ftis anti-rationalism about motivation. If we claim that we are free only if we are moved by distinctively rational desires, we commit ourselves, in Hutcheson’s view, to denying the reality of freedom, because there are no distinctively rational desires. 
- Hutcheson’s account of the moral sense maintains:
    - Internal connexion between moral judgment and motivation. 
    - Epistemological claim, that moral judgment is not a kind of rational belief and judgment
    - Metaphysical claim, that moral properties are not features of the actions and people to whom we seem to ascribe them, but are ideas in our minds.
- In claiming that moral goodness is essentially what is approved by the moral sense, he implies that any change in our moral sense would also be a change in what is morally right. 
- When we learn more about the effects of an apparently benevolent action, for instance, our initial feeling of approval may change to a feeling of disapproval.
- Hutcheson allows that moral judgments are corrigible, and argues that his theory allows for the relevant sort of correction.
- He remarks that this assertion, as defenders of voluntarism intend it, depends on the non-voluntarist belief that being good consists in something more than in being willed by God; for the voluntarist reassures us only if we take ‘God’s will is good’ to say more than that God’s will is God’s will.
- Hutcheson rejects the conclusion that whatever God willed, it would be good. Against the voluntarist view, he affirms that God is essentially benevolent. Since we know this about God, we also know that it is not an accident that we have the moral sense that we have. Our approval of benevolence results from God’s benevolent choice to give us a moral sense that approves of actions promoting our greatest good. 
- Hutcheson’s theory implies that God is good insofar as our moral sense approves of his character and actions. This account of God’s goodness implies that if our moral sense were to change and no longer approve benevolence, God would no longer be good. This result seems even more surprising than the voluntarist claim that if God were to will that we act cruelly rather than kindly, kindness would no longer be good. Instead of making our goodness depend on God, the sentimentalist seems to make God’s goodness depend on ours. 
- We might say that what is right is what is approved of now or at some other fixed time or place, and say that what is right remains the same even if people’s moral sense differs over time. (See Lewis, §659 above.) But it is difficult to see what would justify picking on one time rather than another. The introduction of a rigid designator seems to imply that we (or any others introduced by the rigid designator) are incorrigible about what is morally right. 
- Hutcheson opposes the position of Pufendorf, who restricts the natural to the pleasant and the expedient (§22), and so he defends the naturalist claim of Suarez and Grotius that moral rightness (honestas) is also natural. He takes the dispute between Pufendorf and the naturalists to turn on whether human beings have natural benevolent desires (§24). If they have, then, in his view, morality is in accordance with human nature, and the anti-naturalist position is refuted. Hutcheson, therefore, takes his doctrine of a moral sense to vindicate naturalism.¹¹ Morality is natural because it is the product of a natural sentiment; it is not simply devised as a means to secure some end that would appeal to us even if we had no moral attitudes. Since this is how he understands the natural character of morality, Hutcheson often contrasts his view with the claim that morality arises from reason; by ‘reason’ he means instrumental reason. 
- Hutcheson’s view is therefore rather similar to Frankfurt’s view about second-order desires, in ‘Freedom’. Butler’s criticism is similar to the objections by those critics of Frankfurt (e.g., Watson, ‘Agency’) who insist on evaluation as opposed to mere higher-order desires. Cf. §639 on Hutcheson. 
- One might argue that morality necessarily conflicts with human nature, on these grounds: (1) Morality requires benevolence—the love of one’s neighbour—and benevolence requires concern for others. (2) We act in accord with nature by following self-love. (3) Self-love conflicts with concern for others. (4) Therefore acting in accord with nature conflicts with morality. This is Hobbes’s view of the state of nature; to remove the conflict between morality and one’s nature, one must be in the circumstances in which benefiting others instrumentally benefits oneself.
Hutcheson answers this argument by conceding the first and third premisses and rejecting the second. He argues that, since we have particular passions distinct from self-love, and since these include ‘kind affections’ concerned with the good of others, it is natural to act on these as well as on self-love. Butler objects to this defence of kind affections because it concedes too much to the critic of morality. Hutcheson agrees that morality conflicts with self-love. In order to show that, nonetheless, it is natural to act on morality, he has to identify natural action with action on one’s strongest desire. This
- Hutcheson, who agrees with Butler in recognizing obligation independent of law, but still identifies obligation with a type of motivation. 
- In rejecting the reduction of all motives to the selfish pursuit of one’s own interest, Butler agrees with Hutcheson. It is not surprising that Hutcheson often draws on Butler in his later work.⁹ Butler also agrees with Hutcheson in not endorsing the extreme rationalism of Clarke and Balguy.¹⁰ But his argument about nature implies that Hutcheson repeats some of Hobbes’s mistakes. Hutcheson agrees with Butler in identifying natural actions and states teleologically and holistically, by reference to the requirements of a human being as a whole.¹¹ But his argument to show that benevolence is natural does not stick to this conception of nature; he argues only that benevolence arises by nature, and is not derived from the pursuit of the expedient. This claim relies only on Butler’s first and second senses of ‘natural’, and does not take account of the third sense.
- Hutcheson disallows rational correction of the moral sense. His opponents assume that it is corrigible by reason, and so they infer that the supreme principle, superior to a moral sense, is a rational principle. Hutcheson concedes corrigibility, but denies that reason corrects. He argues by analogy, pointing out that theoretical reason is wrong if it judges hastily or on insufficient evidence, but we still use reason to correct reason, by reconsideration. Similarly, the moral sense corrects and regulates itself.¹⁹ According to Hutcheson, Butler’s phenomenological tests for identifying conscience as the supreme principle pick out the moral sense; they do not require a rational principle. 
- Hume might reasonably believe, however, that Hutcheson is inexplicit about the subjectivist implications of his position. In his early work Hutcheson defends Shaftesbury’s ‘realist’ position. He does not explicitly abandon that position in Illustrations, even though he affirms the subjective character of moral properties. He insists that his position does not question the ‘reality’ of our moral ideas, any more than it questions the reality of our idea of pleasure. By this he means that the idea of pleasure is a real and distinct idea, even though pleasure is subjective.¹³ This sort of ‘reality’, however, is not the whole of Shaftesbury’s moral realism; for Shaftesbury also treats moral properties as objective.¹⁴ Hutcheson does not retain the objectivist element in Shaftesbury’s realism, though he does not explicitly reject it either. 
- Hume’s request to Hutcheson concerns the subjectivism and sentimentalism that Hutcheson also affirms. The same doctrine is relevant to Hume’s further remark that Hutcheson has given no sufficient reason for accepting naturalism rather than voluntarism about God and morality.¹⁶ Hutcheson rejects Balguy’s allegation that sentimentalism implies voluntarism, and so he defends an important element in Shaftesbury’s realism. In rejecting voluntarism he agrees with Butler. Hume, however, agrees with Balguy’s objection that Hutcheson cannot escape voluntarism about God and morality.¹⁷ Sentimentalism implies that moral properties exist only in relation to spectators with sentiments like ours. Hence they cannot, according to Hume, be assumed to exist in relation to God.¹⁸ Whether or not it is right for God to do anything depends on how God reacts to it. If God’s moral sense is different from ours, what is right for him is different from what is right for us. If he has no moral sense, nothing is right or wrong for him.¹⁹ Hume suggests that Hutcheson should discuss this issue more fully in print only if he thinks he can avoid the agnostic conclusion about God’s moral outlook. If, like Hume, he believes the agnostic conclusion is correct, his ‘character’ (i.e., reputation) and ‘situation’ (as a professor of moral philosophy expected to support Christian morality) make it unwise for him to publish his views. 
- Balguy and Hutcheson believe that if sentimentalism is committed to voluntarism, we have reason to doubt sentimentalism. 
- Hutcheson confines the moral sense to the moral judge who reacts favourably to the benevolence of an agent; he makes a second-order attitude of approval or endorsement of a sentiment essential to the moral sense. Simple benevolence without this further approval does not involve the moral sense, according to Hutcheson. The further approval is Hutcheson’s analogue to the operation of conscience, as Butler conceives it.³⁵ 
- In Hutcheson psychology determines epistemology; for he believes that the sort of moral knowledge that rationalists attribute to us could not influence our actions in the way that moral knowledge plainly does, and so he infers that his moral psychology shows the error in rationalist epistemology.⁹
- Hutcheson agrees with Cudworth and Balguy in believing that moral properties are not arbitrary and positive, but have a firmer basis in nature; hence he tries to show that his sentimentalism does not introduce an unwelcome degree of mutability.
- This law-based and action-oriented outlook is often taken to be characteristic of modern as opposed to ancient moral outlooks.³³ If we consider sentimentalism with this contrast in mind, it seems to go in the ‘ancient’ direction. Hutcheson takes the moral sense to approve of benevolence, a state of the agent.








#                  Difficulties

- Hutcheson takes a step that Shaftesbury does not take, by defniing moral goodness as essentially what is approved by the moral sense. He takes the moral sense to be disinterested, and therefore he supposes that he defends Shaftesbury. This interpretation of the moral sense and its relation to moral goodness is also Berkeley’s interpretation of Shaftesbury, and it is the basis for Berkeley’s criticism.⁵⁷ But Hutcheson overlooks the fact that he defends only the motivational part of Shaftesbury’s realist doctrine, and that he undermines the metaphysical part. Balguy points out this consequence of Hutcheson’s modification of Shaftesbury; he shows that Hutcheson’s position exposes him to Shaftesbury’s argument against theological voluntarism.⁵⁸ 
- Hutcheson’s indirect utilitarian defence of more specific principles and traits suggests that we need not face the uncertainties of calculating utility on every occasion on which we have to decide what it is right to do.⁴⁴ But one may doubt whether the indirect utilitarian defence succeeds, if it is applied to the specifci rules and traits that Clarke takes to be clearly right. 
- Prudential hedonism, however, does not seem plausible without psychological hedonism.²³ It seems arbitrary to identify one’s own good with pleasure, and to ignore the objects apart from pleasure that we recognize as possible objects of pursuit. Hutcheson does not explain why he accepts prudential hedonism. He argues that our moral sentiments and moral sense are not expressions of desires for our own pleasure, and he infers that they are not self-interested desires. He assumes that psychological egoism collapses with psychological hedonism. Similarly, he assumes that the supremacy of the desire for one’s own happiness would imply the supremacy of a selfish desire. This assumption makes it difficult for him to understand the eudaemonism of the ancient moralists. He interprets it in two different ways: (1) He suggest that eudaemonists recognize unselfish desires not arising from self-love, but ‘subject’ these desires to the selfish desire for one’s own pleasure.²⁴ (2) He suggests that the ancients treat the desire for one’s own happiness as the starting-point of action, from which we may develop desires that are not focussed on happiness. In his support he appeals to their views on friendship and on patriotism.²⁵ He acknowledges that eudaemonist views, whichever way we interpret them, do not deny unselfish desire and action. But he still assumes that their conception of the ultimate end is selfish. He overlooks the possibility that some of the ends of unselfish affections are parts of perfection and happiness, not simply means to it; for he assumes that if the ‘kind’ affections are subordinate to happiness, they are subordinate to an essentially selfsih end. He maintains that moral sentiments are independent of our desire for our own happiness; but, given the possibility of non-hedonistic eudaemonism, his argument against psychological hedonism does not rule out every egoist account of the basis of morality.²⁶ 
- If moral reasons are not derived from self-interest, they must provide suffciient reasons by themselves, without reference to any more ultimate reasons. Our recognition, for instance, that this action promotes the public good must provide—in conjunction with the relevant desire—a reason for doing it, without appeal to any further self-interested consideration. But a simple desire for the good of others for their own sake does not make someone morally good. Even if such a desire is entirely non-self-regarding, we could have it without approving of our action. It is characteristic of a morally good person, however, to approve of this desire, whether in himself or in someone else; that is the essentially reflexive element of morality. To make a moral judgment on an action is not simply to add another desire to our initial desire to do the action; it is to express the view that this desire is right and appropriate for an agent in these circumstances. A rationalist might accept these arguments. If promotion of the public good is a sufficient justification and admits no further justification, perhaps reason recognizes this justification.²⁷ Similarly, the reflexive character of moral judgment may result from rational recognition of the appropriate desire.²⁸ Hutcheson, however, believes that his arguments against psychological egoism also refute rationalism. Our moral judgments do not rest on reasoning about consequences because they do not rest on reasoning at all; they are too immediate to be the product of reasoning. If we had to depend on reason, our moral judgments would be wavering and unreliable. God’s goodness provides us with a moral sense, so that we are not left to work out the right actions by our limited rational capacities.²⁹ If we are as acute as Cumberland and Pufendorf, reflexion on our own advantage will lead us to the actions that the moral sense approves; but the moral sense, directly approving benevolent actions, reaches the same conclusion more immediately and reliably.³⁰ This argument for the moral sense as opposed to reason, directly addresses only those opponents who identify reason with strictly self-interested calculation. ³¹ Hutcheson assumes that moral properties can be matters for rational judgments only if they are found to promote one’s self-interest.³² But his observations on the immediacy of moral judgments could also be used against opponents who treat them as the product of non-egoistic reasoning. Hutcheson legitimately insists that any adequate account of moral judgments has to explain their immediacy. But this requirement does not rule out all rationalist views known to Hutcheson. The appeal to immediacy does not seem to count against Clarke’s views. For Clarke does not believe that moral judgments are rational because they are the conclusions of complex calculations of self-interest, or because they depend on any other complicated process of reasoning. As he points out, many mathematical and logical judgments appear to be immediate, but do not seem to belong to a sense.
- Not every sort of sensory awareness, however, includes detection of external reality. Hutcheson argues that beauty is an idea ‘raised in us’ by objects (IB 1.9 = L 23), to which nothing similar in the objects corresponds. If we recognize beauty in an object we are aware of objective properties of it, such as order, symmetry, and proportion; but though these properties give us the idea of beauty, they are not the beauty in the object.³⁷ A subjectivist analysis would cast doubt on part of Shaftesbury’s defence of his ‘moral realist’ view that moral properties are aspects of reality and not simply creations of our minds through choices, desires, or legislation. The Inquiry does not show what Hutcheson thinks about this part of Shaftesbury’s position. He does not discuss the conflict between Shaftesbury’s aims, which he shares, and the result he has reached.³⁸
- One might argue if his account of the moral sense reaches a subjectivist conclusion, one ought to consider whether (The Inquiry does not pursue these questions any further. Though Hutcheson seems to commit himself to a subjectivist account of the moral sense, he does not develop such an account):
    - something is wrong with his account of a sense 
    - he has applied this account wrongly to the moral sense. If we reject the frist and second possibilities, and we believe that a realist position is plausible, we may find the third possibility attractive. 
    - he is wrong to claim that we are aware of moral properties by a moral sense. 
    - Though Shaftesbury anticipates Hutcheson in speaking of a moral sense, his remarks on the sense of right and wrong do not deny that moral judgment is rational; they simply seem to assert that we have some immediate and disinterested grasp of moral goodness. But Hutcheson goes further than Shaftesbury on this point; for he intends his doctrine of a moral sense to refute a rationalist account of moral judgment. We might suppose that he simply means his anti-rationalism to rule out an indirect egoist account of moral judgment. Perhaps he means only that moral judgment is not based on reasoning about good consequences for oneself. If that is all he means, he does not exclude the possibility that moral judgment is based on, or incorporates, some different exercise of reason. But he never recognizes this possibility. The reason for his failure to recognize it becomes clear in the Illustrations, where he expands his account of the moral sense in relation to some of Hobbes’s and Locke’s views on action and motivation.⁴⁴ 
    - Hobbes’s account of morality rests on his moral psychology, and in particular on his conception of practical reason. He denies that practical reason is the source of any distinctive ends; its only function is to fnid means to ends that are independently fxied by non-rational desires.⁴⁵ Locke and Hutcheson develop this Hobbesian view. We have found it useful, in discussing both the mediaeval disputes and the dispute between Hobbes and Bramhall, to distinguish intellectualism (the view that action depends primarily on intellect rather than will) from rationalism (the view that action depends on passion rather than rational will). Aquinas is a moderate intellectualist, but also a rationalist, whereas Scotus is both a voluntarist and a rationalist. Hobbes’s discussion does not distinguish the two positions, and on this point Locke and Hutcheson follow him. 
- Hutcheson, however, rejects both moderate intellectualism, and rationalism. He follows Locke in holding that action depends on our having desires for ends that are independent of practical reason. He argues that to avoid an infniite regress of ends in explaining actions, we must recognize basic, non-rational instincts that rest on no further reasons.⁵² This argument goes beyond Scholastic moderate intellectualism; for a moderate intellectualist might agree that all action requires desire, but still maintain that reasoning about the good produces the appropriate sort of desire. Though Hutcheson explicitly attacks only extreme intellectualism, his conclusions conflict with both moderate intellectualism and rationalism. Hutcheson’s conception of the relevant options casts doubt on some of his claims about Aristotle and the Scholastics. He relies on Aristotle’s claim that deliberation is confined to means to ends, and ends are the objects of wish.⁵³ He infers that, in this Aristotelian scheme, the most ultimate ends must be taken for granted in any deliberation. And so he concludes that the desire for the highest end, happiness, is not the product of practical reason. All this is a reasonable interpretation of Aristotle. But Hutcheson goes wrong in his claim that the desire for happiness is a non-rational impulse or instinct or, as Locke puts it, ‘uneasiness’ that is prior to practical reason. In his view, it is a particular instinct, not essential to rational agency. This is not the Aristotelian view of the desire for happiness. According to Aquinas, the ascription of such a desire is equivalent to the ascription of rational desire to an agent. It is not a particular desire or instinct on a level with a liking for oranges rather than apples. It is the structural feature of other desires that makes them all desires of a rational agent. To have a desire for one’s own happiness is to be disposed to pursue each of one’s desires to the right degree, so that it does not impede the appropriate satisfaction of other desires. Practical reason, therefore, does not merely fnid some means to satisfy a non-rational desire that is prior to practical reason. It discovers the nature of happiness by fniding the appropriate degree of satisfaction for different desires. In holding this view, Aristotle and Aquinas take a moderate intellectualist view of the relation of reason, will, and desire. 
- Hutcheson, however, treats happiness as though it were a contingent fact that this is the end of all our desires. He treats extreme intellectualism and his own anti-rationalism as the only options to consider. Both Hutcheson and Locke fail to distinguish extreme from moderate intellectualism, and intellectualism from rationalism, because they look at the traditional view in the light of assumptions that they share with Hobbes.⁵⁴ 
- He does not disagree radically, therefore, with Hobbes’s view of motivation and practical reason. For he supposes that the recognition of a reason—exciting or justifying—is simply the recognition that something arouses a particular sort of non-rational desire or sentiment that was present apart from the recognition of this sort of reason. Deliberation, therefore, proceeds by the awareness of desires or sentiments aroused by different considerations that are presented to us. This conception of deliberation prevents us from recognizing distinctively rational desires. Hutcheson’s account of reasons matches his anti-rationalism about desire and reason. In his view, the recognition of reasons is simply the recognition of considerations arousing desires. He accepts the most controversial feature in Hobbes’s account of deliberation. 
- The claim that ends are not the objects of distinctively rational desires explains Hutcheson’s view on freewill, and especially his opposition to rationalist views. The rationalist Balguy argues that if we are moved wholly by non-rational desires for ends, we do not act freely and responsibly; he assumes that merit requires freedom, and freedom requires the capacity for rational motivation.⁶² Hutcheson answers that non-rational desire is the basis of all action,⁶³ so that if freedom really required motivation by reason rather than non-rational desire, no action could ever be free. Even if action on ‘mere election’ without any reason to choose one or another option were possible, it would be morally insignifciant, and not a candidate for merit.⁶⁴ ‘Then determining ourselves freely, does it mean acting without any motive or exciting reason? The first sentence above seems to suggest that all action has an exciting reason. This conflicts with Hutcheson’s view that when we act on a justifying reason we act without an exciting reason. His claims are consistent if we take ‘motive or exciting reason’ to be alternatives, not equivalents, and take motives to be justifying reasons. Hutcheson believes that his opponents must assume that acting freely is acting without a reason, because he takes ‘acting without a reason’ to cover three different cases: (1) Choosing x over y without seeing something to choose between x and y. (2) Choosing x over y without desiring x as better than y. (3) Choosing x over y without having a stronger non-rational desire for x. These different cases are relevant to different disputes with different opponents.⁶⁵ A voluntarist such as Scotus or Ockham who does not reduce the will to a passion argues that all three types of choice are possible, but an intellectualist such as Aquinas denies the possibility of the first sort of choice. With qualifications, Aquinas also denies the possibility of the second sort of choice; the qualifications depend on the role he assigns to election in incontinent action.⁶⁶ But he affrims, as Balguy affrims against Hutcheson, the possibility of the third sort of choice. From either a voluntarist or an intellectualist point of view, free action requires the determination of action by something other than the superior strength of a non-rational desire. All these views assume that we can avoid acting on our strongest non-rational desire. But, according to Hutcheson, if we could avoid this, we could thereby choose x over y for no reason and on the basis of no recognized difference between them—the frist of the three alleged possibilities mentioned above. Since Hutcheson rejects the first possibility, he thinks he is entitled to reject the second and third also. His sentimentalist view traces actions back to impulses and passions rather than to rational choice, but it does not (in his view) threaten freedom. He rejects only the alleged freedom that requires action without a sufficient motive. This conception of freedom relies on Hutcheson’s analysis of action and motivation, which will not persuade anyone who disputes his views on freedom. If we allow distinctively rational motivation, we will deny that we must always act on our strongest non-rational motive. We may allow that we act on our ‘strongest’ desire, if we take ‘strength’ to include the strength of reasons as well as the non-rational force of desires.⁶⁷ But if we understand ‘strength’ so broadly, it allows action on the desire supported by stronger reasons against a more forceful non-rational desire, contrary to Hutcheson’s view. According to Aquinas and others, the capacity to act on apparently stronger reasons is essential for freedom. If human action rested on a non-rational passion aiming at the ultimate end, it would not be free, but in fact it is free because the desire for the final good is not a non-rational passion. Hutcheson ignores this account of freedom. It depends on a rationalist account of rational will and desire, but he does not recognize rationalism as an option distinct from extreme intellectualism and from his own anti-rationalism. Since he does not refute a rationalist account of freedom, he does not show that questions about freedom are irrelevant to morality. 
- - In the Illustrations, however, he recognizes Clarke’s rationalism as a third option besides his position and the egoism that he has rejected in the Inquiry.⁶⁸ He rejects this third option, because he believes that anti-rationalism about motivation also requires anti-rationalism about moral judgment. Rational beliefs alone cannot produce either exciting or justifying reasons. Non-rational affections must be presupposed; they explain why our belief that something promotes the public good makes a difference to our action. Since Clarke is an extreme rationalist and intellectualist, he assumes that the rational recognition of fitnesses ensures the right motivation. But since Hutcheson rejects the extreme intellectualist assumptions, he also rejects rationalism about moral judgment. He does not consider the possibility that moral judgments belong to reason, but are insufficient for motivation. He assumes that a moral judgment must motivate; every time we make a moral judgment that we ought to do a particular action, we must be moved (to some extent) to do that action. He therefore assumes an internal logical connexion between accepting the truth of a moral judgment and being motivated to act on it. Why should we admit this internal logical connexion? Could we not make a moral judgment about an action, and so cite a normative reason for it, without having any feeling of approbation? Hutcheson answers that moral judgments include awareness of obligation, and since awareness of obligation to do x is awareness of a motive for doing x, moral judgment requires awareness of motivation.⁶⁹ He assumes that obligation implies some type of necessity or compulsion, and that the only relevant type of necessity is some necessity in the motives of the person obliged or in the moral judge. we distinguish three elements: (1) the reasons that constitute the obligation, (2) the recognition of the obligation, and (3) the motive resulting from the recognition. Hutcheson, however, seems to collapse the three elements into one. 
- Hutcheson disagrees with the specific reduction that Hobbes attempts, since he rejects the reduction of benevolence and moral approval to selfsih desire. But he still takes each normative fact to be about a mental state of the subject. Since moral judgments state a reason for acting and an obligation to act, Hutcheson assumes that they describe our motivation. 
- He does not stick consistently to his utilitarian analysis. Price draws attention to Hutcheson’s acknowledgment of our immediate approval of justice and veracity, in addition to our approval of them for their consequences.²⁷ Hutcheson might try a utilitarian explanation of his remarks on immediate approval in order to answer Price’s objection. Perhaps our approval of justice does not depend on a calculation ofitsconsequenceshereandnow; still, theformation ofthisattitudeofimmediate approval towards a just action is justified only by our approval of the consequences of the general observance of justice. 
- An indirect egoist might answer that we do not think about our own advantage when we approve things morally, but nonetheless our unselfsih approval is justifeid and supported by consideration of our own advantage. Though Mandeville is wrong (on this view) to deny that we have unselfish motives, he would be right to affirm that our ultimate motives are selfish. If Hutcheson accepts indirect utilitarianism, should he not also accept this indirect egoist argument? If he should, his acceptance of indirect utilitarianism subverts his whole argument about the moral sense. This is a reasonable reply to indirect egoism, but it raises two diffciulties for Hutcheson: 
    - The counterfactual argument assumes that our moral approval essentially relies on certain reasons. If it were a simple favourable feeling that does not consider one’s own advantage, it would not be inherently selfish, but it would not be inherently unselfish either. Whether or not our moral approval is unselfsih depends on the considerations that it takes as reasons for approval. Hence it must be essentially open to specifci sorts of reasons and not to others. It must have a rational structure that does not easily fit Hutcheson’s conception of the moral sense. If Hutcheson emphasizes the comparison with a sense, and hence takes the moral sense to be simple approval, without essential reference to specifci reasons, he makes it easier to defend both the indirect utilitarianism he accepts and the indirect egoism he rejects. On the other hand, if he emphasizes the dependence of moral judgment and approval on specifci reasons, he makes it easier to refute both the indirect egoism he rejects and the indirect utilitarianism he accepts. How should he clarify or amend his position? If moral approval essentially depends on certain kinds of reasons for approval, it differs from an ordinary sense in this respect, and the comparison with a sense is correspondingly less useful. A more plausible conception of moral approval seems to make it easier for Hutcheson to maintain his opposition to egoism, but more difficult for him to maintain indirect utilitarianism.
    - If we reject an indirect egoist account of the moral sense, can we not offer analogous arguments against indirect utilitarianism? Hutcheson might deny the analogy, since he argues that we respond to utilitarian considerations in our moral reasoning. But he does not show that we rely on the maximizing aspects of utilitarianism. Even if an indirect utilitarian defence of our moral attitudes might be given, it may not explain our attitudes. 
- This conclusion is surprising. For Hutcheson’s comparison of moral approval with sensory awareness is intended to support his argument against egoism. He believes that if he shows our reaction to moral good and evil is immediate, and hence independent of complex calculations about advantage, he refutes an egoist analysis. But his discussion of indirect utilitarianism suggests that immediacy does not help his argument against egoism as much as he supposes. To resist an indirect egoist analysis of the moral sense, he needs to give the moral sense more rational structure. 
- Hutcheson does not recognize the good-dependence of desires of the rational part, as Plato and Aristotle understand them, since his account of motivation precludes good-dependent desires. Calm and refelctive desires, his substitute for rational desires, are the source of impartial benevolence.³² 
- Because of Hutcheson's subjectivism, our moral sense may not always agree with benevolence. If other-regarding motives distinct from utilitarian benevolence sometimes influence us, our moral sense might sometimes approve of their influence. If normal observers sometimes approve utilitarian benevolence, but often approve some action or attitude that does not maximize utility, then moral rightness sometimes maximizes utility, but sometimes does not. Hutcheson might argue that a particular person’s moral sense is mistaken if it disagrees with utilitarianism, and that it ought to be adjusted to the utilitarian outlook. The comparison of the moral sense to ordinary senses allows some correction. Particular sensory reactions can be corrected by appeal to the reactions of normal perceivers in normal conditions.³⁵ Similarly, the reaction of one person’s moral sense on one occasion can be corrected by reference to the reactions of the normal spectator on this sort of occasion. But Hutcheson’s theory leaves only limited room for correction. The moral sense is aware of objective properties—the tendency of an action to promote the public good, and the disposition of the agent to promote it. But these properties are not the moral goodness of the action, because the moral goodness is not an objective property of the action, but a feature of the observer’s reaction to it. We cannot, then, correct one person’s moral sense by reference to objective moral properties that it aims to detect, since there are no such properties for it to detect; we must correct it by reference to the normal observer. For similar reasons, the ‘normal’ observer cannot be the one who actually detects the relevant objective moral properties; normality must be understood without reference to any beliefs about the objective properties to be detected. Correction by reference to normal observers may not favourut ilitarianism. Their reactions to conflicts between utilitarianism and less universal attitudes (as Hutcheson considers them) are likely to vary, both between different people and in the same person between different occasions. Hence the appeal to the normal observer yields no clear decision. If Hutcheson refuses to correct our moral sense by an external moral standard, his defence of utilitarianism commits him to the empirical claim that normal spectators approve of the utilitarian solution of any conflict between utilitarian benevolence and less universal or non-maximizing moral attitudes. But this empirical claim is doubtful. 
- Hutcheson is a Cognitivist, though Frankena argues that he is Non-Cognitivist
- He treats statements about obligations and rightness as predictions about how normal observers react. He cannot consistently say that normal observers ought to be corrected, or that they ought to take moral distinctions more seriously than they do; for these ought-judgments are also predictions about the reactions of normal observers. Even if we agree with the reactions of normal observers, Hutcheson’s theory prevents us from giving the natural interpretation of our agreement. We are inclined to suppose that if we believe our moral sense is usually right, or that we ought to follow it, we accord authority to the moral sense because it conforms to some standard external to it. But Hutcheson’s account of moral judgments as statements about the reactions of the moral sense³⁶ prevents us from evaluating the moral sense in this way.³⁷ 
- Utilitarianism, therefore, both seems attractive from a sentimentalist point of view and raises objections to it:
    - If we believe that morally good and bad action results from benevolence, aiming at the pleasure of others, we may suppose that the best action results from the most extensive benevolence aiming at maximum pleasure.
    - If we did not suppose that some sentiment has to be the basis of morally right action, this argument for utilitarianism would not seem plausible; but if we are convinced by Hutcheson’s anti-rationalism about motivation, benevolence seems to be the most plausible sentiment to treat as the basis of morally good action. Once we see that better actions seem to result from more extended benevolence, the utilitarian conclusion seems plausible. This conclusion about the moral agent, however, commits Hutcheson to the further claim that the enlightened moral judge with the correct moral sense is the one who approves of benevolence, and approves of it more the more widely it is extended. If moral judges lack this utilitarian reaction, Hutcheson faces a difficult choice. To safeguard the utilitarian approach in normative ethics, he needs to abandon sentimentalist meta-ethics. 
- Some normal judges will approve of utility (we may grant), but others will not. Hutcheson’s utilitarian analysis of virtues, rights, and laws of nature may well be a true report of what he approves of. But he cannot claim that this necessarily gives a reason for others to approve of the same things; whether they have a reason or not depends on how they react. Sidgwick believes that for these reasons Hutcheson cannot adequately defend the objective truth of utilitarianism. In Sidgwick’s view, a proper rational defence of utilitarianism, or any other objective moral principle, depends on acceptance of a rationalist account of moral judgments, in contrast to Hutcheson’s sentimentalism. He suggests that on this point Hume drew the logical conclusion from Hutcheson’s position, and so made people aware of the dangerous consequences of sentimentalism.³⁸ Sidgwick wrongly suggests that only Hume’s endorsement of Hutcheson’s sentimentalism made the implications of Hutcheson’s position clear. As we will see, Balguy and Burnet (not to mention Butler) already criticize Hutcheson’s sentimentalism for its subjectivist tendencies; they do not need Hume to point out the implications of Hutcheson’s position. But Sidgwick is right about the philosophical issue that Hutcheson raises. If we try to defend utilitarianism without sentimentalism, we raise doubts about the sentimentalist assumptions that make utilitarianism seem attractive in the first place. 
- Hutcheson’s position seems, at first sight, impressively systematic; but closer attention suggests that it is incoherent. His main diffciulties arise from several sources: 
    - He appeals to the immediacy of the moral sense to refute indirect egoism; but he seems to defend utilitarianism by indirect arguments that seem to offer equal support for indirect egoism. Hence his case against egoism and his case for utilitarianism seem to undermine each other.
    - His anti-rationalism supports his appeal to a moral sense, but his subjectivist conception of the moral sense undermines his utilitarianism. 
- Hutcheson’s account of reason and action, together with the assumption that recognition of moral rightness and wrongness guides our action, supports his belief in a moral sense. He argues that if we are obliged, we must have some feeling that motivates us to do what we are obliged to do. This non-rational feeling is the moral sense, and an action’s rightness consists in its being approved by this moral sense. We might disagree with this claim for different reasons: 
    - We might accept Hutcheson’s strong internalist assumption—that the recognition of moral rightness implies a motive for acting rightly—but maintain rationalism about motivation, claiming that no nonrational desire is needed to make our recognition of rightness practically effective.⁷
    - We might reject internalism and deny that recognition of rightness by itself moves us to action. 
- Hutcheson replies that Burnet’s appeal to the reasonableness of one or another end is empty.¹⁰ An end is not reasonable in its own right, but only in relation to some further end for which we have an antecedent desire. Similarly, we cannot judge an end reasonable except relatively to a further desired end. Hence judgments about reasonableness must depend on a further desire; hence we need a moral sense. To show that an end cannot be reasonable in its own right, Hutcheson argues that it is always appropriate to ask ‘What makes it reasonable?’. To say that nothing makes it reasonable, or that it makes itself reasonable, is uninformative. To say what makes it reasonable, we always have to say that it appeals to us on the basis of some further end we care about. In the case of morality, the relevant further end is the public good, which appeals to our moral sense. The mere claim that something is reasonable in itself is an appeal to an alleged brute fact. BurnetandBalguyreplythatsomereasonsmustbetakenasultimate,sincewecannotshow their reasonableness by appeal to further reasons. Similarly (according to Clarke and Burnet) no further reason can be given for accepting a mathematical axiom, but we do not infer that mathematical judgment requires a further contribution from the affections. On the contrary, mathematical judgments consist in recognizing axioms as ultimate reasons and in reasoning in accordance with them. It is equally appropriate to recognize ultimately reasonable moral principles and to judge in accordance with them. If they are ultimately reasonable, no more ultimate reasons can be given to show that they are reasonable; but it doesnotfollowthatwemustappealtosomefurthernon-rationaldesire.BalguyagreesthatifI recognizeamoralprincipleasultimatelyreasonable,Iwillnormallywanttoactinaccordance with it; but he claims that the desire results from the recognition, and does not explain it.¹¹ If a defender of Hutcheson objects that Balguy is appealing to a mere brute fact, not further explained, Balguy might answer that Hutcheson also appeals to a brute fact—a non-rational desire and a tendency to act on that desire. Can we not ask why we should act on that desire? The question ‘Why should I?’ suggests that we are looking for some further reason that Hutcheson fails to provide.  In this dispute about brute facts the anti-rationalist complains that the rationalist cannot say why we act on what we see to be ultimately reasonable. The rationalist complains that the anti-rationalist cannot say why we should act on basic non-rational desires for ends. The anti-rationalist, therefore, complains about the rationalist’s failure to provide a motivating reason, whereas the rationalist complains about the anti-rationalist’s failure to provide a normative reason. At first sight, both complaints seem reasonable. Balguy’s discussion shows that Hutcheson’s assumptions about explanation and reasons do not define all the legitimate questions that can be raised. 
- Even if some opposed non-rational impulse might interfere with the normal operation of rational assent, it does not follow that its normal operation depends on a favourable non-rational impulse; it follows only that no interfering impulse is present. Balguy might reasonably observe that we often seem to act on the basis of our belief that we have a good reason to do what we try to do. If Hutcheson replies that we must nonetheless have some further non-rational impulse favouring the rational course of action, why should we agree? Either he argues illegitimately from the absence of interfering impulses to the presence of favouring impulses, or he takes his general anti-rationalist account for granted in order to dismiss apparent counter-examples.
- Hutcheson’s internalist constraint, then, does not seem so clearly true that it disqualifies Balguy’s examples of moral goodness and moral judgment without benevolent affections and a moral sense. Balguy argues plausibly that our ordinary moral convictions recognize possibilities that Hutcheson overlooks. Hutcheson might answer that our ordinary moral convictions are mistaken about the nature of moral goodness and of moral judgment. Our belief in the purely rational goodness of Louis and the purely rational judgment of Kurt rests on assumptions about reason that Hutcheson believes he has undermined. But he relies on questionable views about practical reason. He points out the obscurity of rationalist claims about reason and about the properties grasped by moral judgment; but he does not show that anti-rationalism is the right answer. 
- Burnet and Balguy appeal to claims about corrigibility that Cudworth uses against Hobbes.³⁰ Cudworth argues that obligation cannot be reduced to commands, because it is open to us to ask whether the commander has the appropriate authority and a command cannot establish its authority simply by commanding. Burnet uses this argument against Hutcheson’s conception of the moral sense. In his view, we are justified in relying on the reactions of the moral sense only insofar as we have some reason to believe that it captures moral rightness. Hence we have to face a real question about moral rightness that is not answered by simply recording the reaction of the moral sense. Since we face such a question, moral rightness is antecedent to the moral sense, not constituted by the reactions of the moral sense.³¹ The moral sense is corrigible in principle by reflexion on whether it accurately represents the properties it purports to represent.³² 
- It is not clear that we take the objects of sense to be relative to the usual perceiver. When we correct one person’s perception of colour by reference to the perceptions of ‘normal’ and ‘healthy’ perceivers, we take the ‘healthy’ perceiver to be not the usual perceiver, but the perceiver who is best at detecting actual redness (whatever we take this to be). If most people were a little colour-blind to differences between red and green, we would not infer that the colours of red and green traffic lights are the same.
- We assume that good judges are good because they detect the relevant properties. Hence the moral properties exist independently of the reactions of good judges; if they did not, good judges would not detect them. Moral properties, therefore, are not essentially what the moral sense approves of. 
- Balguy acknowledges that Hutcheson presents these arguments against voluntarism.³⁸ But he believes that, even if Hutcheson tries to avoid voluntarism, sentimentalism repeats the central errors of voluntarism, and is therefore open to Cudworth’s objections against Hobbes.³⁹ For it seems that a reasonable question can be asked about whether what the moral sense approves is good. In asking this question, we are not asking whether the moral sense approves what it approves. The latter question is easily answered, but the question we want to ask is not so easily answered. 
- We might defend Hutcheson by relying on the difference between these two types of open question. Perhaps Balguy’s objection proves only that the moral sense theory creates a semantic open question about ‘right’ and ‘approved by the moral sense’, so that we cannot claim that ‘right’ means ‘approved by the moral sense’. But the moral sense theory is not intended—Hutcheson might reply—as an account of the meaning of moral terms, and so the presence of semantic open questions raises no diffciulty for it. But if Hutcheson relies on this defence, he raises a doubt about his objection to theological voluntarism. He seems to say that he has identified a semantic open question (when he says that substitutions would make the sentences either ridiculous or very disputable). But why should theological voluntarists not reply that they do not intend to analyse the meaning of moral terms, but to give an account of what moral rightness consists in? Semantic open questions do not necessarily undermine such an account.⁴³ 
- From the rationalist point of view, Hutcheson’s position implies that the ends God achieves in the world do not reflect God’s wisdom, since, according to the sentimentalist, wisdom and reason do not apply to the choice of ends. But if we reflect on the wisdom and goodness of God, we must—according to the rationalists—include the ends that God achieves in creation.⁵⁴ If, as Hutcheson implies, these ends are not the result of God’s wisdom in choosing, God is no wiser in choosing to benefit the creation than he would be in choosing to torture his innocent creatures.⁵⁵ 
- HumetriestoresolvetwodifficultiesarisingfromHutcheson’saccountofjustice:(1) Thefirst objection concerns Hutcheson’s sentimentalism. Hutcheson rejects Hobbes’s self-interested and instrumental explanation of justice, and claims instead that justice appeals to our sentiment of benevolence, which the moral sense approves of. But it is diffciult to believe his claim that benevolence, understood as a sentiment involving an immediate reaction to actions and people, could support a utilitarian conception of justice that often acts against the interest of particular people who might be expected to arouse our benevolent sentiment. (2) But even if we could connect benevolence with utility, we would not have vindicated a utilitarian conception of justice. For we recognize just actions that do not promote utility. These two difficulties in Hutcheson’s position provoke two rationalist replies: (1) Balguy and Butler propose an alternative basis for benevolence. They introduce a rational principle of benevolence, and they rely on this principle, not on the sentiment of benevolence, to support moral principles that aim at the public good. (2) But even this rational principle of benevolence does not cover the whole of morality, and in particular does not cover justice. Principles of justice rest on a basis that is distinct from concern for the public good, and therefore cannot be explained by a utilitarian principle. 
- We noticed two leading tendencies in Hutcheson: (1) He seeks to defend a position close to what Shaftesbury calls ‘moral realism’, opposed to the egoist and voluntarist conception defended by Hobbes. (2) He rejects the rationalist defence of this moral realism that appeals to intuitions of ftiness, and he replaces it with a moral sense theory.⁷⁹ Hutcheson’s rationalist critics, Burnet and Balguy, argue that the two sides of Hutcheson’s position conflict, because the moral sense theory is subject to the basic objections that refute Hobbes’s position. Hutcheson, therefore, agrees with his rationalist opponents in believing that the objections ofCudworthandShaftesburyundermineHobbes’sposition,andthattheyidentifyconditions of adequacy for any moral theory. He disagrees with them insofar as he believes that he can meet their objections to Hobbes without accepting rationalism. 
- Hume notices that Hutcheson attributes to the moral sense some of the authority that Butler attributes to conscience as supreme principle. Butler’s claims about authority, however, rest on the distinction between power and authority, which Hutcheson undermines by taking reasons to refer to actual desires, rather than to what one ought to desire. Hume sees, therefore, that the approval of our moral sense cannot claim the rational authority that Butler claims for conscience, so that Hutcheson ought not to appeal to Butler’s claims about authority and supremacy. 
- Hutcheson follows Butler in claiming that morality accords with human nature, but Hume argues that Hutcheson is not entitled to Butler’s naturalism. Butler’s conception of nature includes claims about actions that are appropriate for human beings as whole systems. The relevant conception of appropriateness relies on the assumption that some actions are rationally appropriate, whether or not they are the objects of our predominant desire. Hume argues that Hutcheson is not entitled to rest any claim of rational authority on an appeal to nature, and that therefore he must give up Butler’s specific appeal to nature. The only basis for an appeal to nature as a source of rational authority is an overtly theological basis, which confronts Hutcheson with further questions. Hume makes it clear that he seeks to correct Hutcheson from Hutcheson’s own premisses, in his discussion of the moral attributes of God. Moral properties exist only insofar as human beings actually have certain reactions; they do not exist as sources of requirements that human beings ought to respond to whether or not they actually do. Hence we cannot say that human beings ought to conform to moral principles or standards irrespective of how they actually react to them. We introduce an ‘arbitrary and positive’ character into moral properties (as Balguy says in discussing Hutcheson). A voluntarist claims that nothing is right or wrong apart from acts of will and command, and so makes moral goodness and rightness mutable in relation to will and command. A sentimentalist makes moral goodness and rightness mutable in relation to sentiments of most judges or of the usual judges. This is what Hume means when he says he wishes he could avoid this conclusion about morality, which has often been urged as an objection to Hutcheson.⁸³ If moral principles have not been shown to have authority for all rational beings, we cannot take God to be bound by them, and so we cannot take them to be antecedent to God’s moral sense, if God has one. Even if we could overcome the difficulties that Hume raises for the attribution of a moral sense to God, we would still have to make moral properties mutable in relation to God’s moral sense. 
- Hutcheson relies on the moral sense and on its approval of benevolence to explain why morality includes principles of justice. He gives a utilitarian explanation of principles of justice, and takes utility to be the concern of benevolence. Hume agrees in trying to connect the moral sense with justice, but he rejects Hutcheson’s claim that justice rests on benevolence. We cannot explain the tenacity of our rules of justice without appealing to a shared recognition of self-interest. The moral sense enters only when we have fixed some relatively stable rules based on this shared recognition of self-interest.  
- Hume’s differences from Hutcheson do not bring Hume all the way back to Hobbes. He departs from Hobbes in recognizing an irreducible unselfish sentiment, and in taking this to be essential for explaining our support of morality within an established social order.⁸⁴ On this point Hume rejects an aspect of Hobbes that might be called ‘scepticism’, and so he affirms the reality of moral distinctions. Hence he insists on the reality of unselfish sentiments, in agreement with Hutcheson. This is one issue that both Hume’s predecessors, from Shaftesbury onwards, and his contemporaries recognize as a clear mark of division between Hobbes and his opponents, and on this issue Hume is clearly against Hobbes.⁸⁵ He supports, as Hutcheson does, one aspect of the position that Shaftesbury calls ‘realism’. 